STRATEGIC ALLIANCE
MANAGEMENT
Strategic Alliance Management presents an academically grounded alliance development
framework, detailing eight stages of alliance development with consideration for specifc
management challenges. For each stage, readers are presented with theoretical insights,
evidence-based managerial guidelines and a business case illustration. Other chapters consider
alliance attributes, alliance competences, and alliance challenges, and cover topics such as
innovation, co-branding, coopetition, business ecosystems, alliance professionals, alliance
capabilities, societal alliances and a tension-based alliance mindset.
This fully revised third edition leverages the book’s strengths in marrying theory with
practical insight.All the chapters have been updated to refect the current academic literature,
whilst new international case studies are incorporated throughout.Two new chapters feature
in this edition, considering the importance of the mindset required to successfully navigate
alliance arrangements, and emerging alliance practices, exploring how new technologies,
sustainability and the external environment have disrupted alliance management. In-chapter
text boxes discussing emerging themes provide opportunity for discussion and analysis.
The textbook remains highly valuable core and recommended reading for postgraduate
students of Strategic Management and Corporate Strategy, MBA and Executive MBA, as well
as refective practitioners in the feld. Online resources include chapter-by-chapter lecture
slides, two long case studies and short interviews with alliance executives.
Brian Tjemkes holds a PhD from Radboud University Nijmegen and is currently employed
as Professor of Strategic Management at the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam. He is Head of
the Strategy section, Director of the International Business Administration programme and
Director of the VU Knowledge Hub for Ecosystems. His research interests centre on strategic
alliances, business ecosystems and strategic leadership. His work has been disseminated
through various academic and professional conferences and publications in, among others,
Journal of Management Studies, Human Relations, International Journal of Management Reviews,
Journal of International Management and Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. He is co-author of
the books Strategic Alliance Management and Transformative Strategizing. He is devoted to sharing
his insights with practice via executive education, workshops, presentations and professional
publications. Orcid: 000-0001-9071-5947
Pepijn Vos works at the Netherlands Organization for Applied Scientifc Research (TNO)
as Researcher and Consultant in the feld of managing strategic alliances, public–private
partnerships and innovation. He holds a Bachelor in Food Technology Management from the
University of Applied Science HAS in Den Bosch and an MSc in Business Administration
at the Radboud University in Nijmegen. In 2008, he joined TNO in the Netherlands as a
researcher and consultant in the feld of open innovation, co-creation, alliance management
and cross sector collaboration. His main interests are in the felds of managing strategic
alliances, (inter-organizational) collaboration and innovation. He works on projects in different
felds such as open innovation, organized crime, energy transition, safety and security. He is
co-author of Strategic Alliance Management and Samen werken—Samen winnen (a Dutch book
on public–private partnerships).
Koen Burgers is an all-round alliance professional. He has experience as Management
Consultant at Kirkman Company. Next, Koen was Director of Strategy and Business
Transformation at Damen Shipyards. Currently, Koen is CEO of SolarDuck, a company active
in offshore foating solar which he co-founded. Koen is an alliance professional and applies
state of the art academic insights and alliance experience in his management activities. He is
co-author of Strategic Alliance Management.

STRATEGIC ALLIANCE
MANAGEMENT
Third edition
Brian Tjemkes, Pepijn Vos and Koen Burgers
Designed cover image: mycola
First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park,Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 Brian Tjemkes, Pepijn Vos and Koen Burgers
The right of Brian Tjemkes, Pepijn Vos and Koen Burgers to be identifed as authors
of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered
trademarks, and are used only for identifcation and explanation without intent to
infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-032-11928-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-11925-0 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-22218-7 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187
Typeset in Bembo
by Apex CoVantage, LLC
Access the Support Material: www.routledge.com/9781032119281
CONTENTS
List of Figures
List of Tables
List of Boxes
Preface
x
xi
xiii
xiv
1
Strategic alliance management
The meaning of an alliance
Alliance activity
Alliance failure
An academically grounded alliance development framework
Alliance challenges
1
2
3
6
7
11
2
Alliance strategy formulation
Three prototypical governance modes
Governance mode rationales
Alliance strategy formulation: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Google–HubSpot
13
13
15
25
28
28
3
Alliance partner selection
Types of partner ft
Alliance partner selection: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: SolarDuck
30
30
35
39
39
vi Contents
4
Alliance negotiation
Negotiation behaviour
Valuation
Alliance negotiation: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Renault–Nissan
43
43
48
48
53
54
5
Alliance design
Governance form
Alliance contracts
Management control
Structural confguration
Alliance design: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Organovo
57
57
64
67
69
71
75
75
6
Alliance launch
Alliance launch objectives and challenges
Alliance launch attributes
Alliance launch: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Capgemini–Eneco
78
78
81
85
89
89
7
Alliance management
Alliance management approaches
Alliance design and management
Alliance management: decision-making steps
Summary
Case:TNO–Hoogendoorn
92
92
101
103
106
107
8
Alliance evaluation
Issues with alliance performance and metrics
Performance metric approaches
Alliance evaluation: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: DBS Singapore
109
109
112
117
120
121
9
Alliance termination
Alliance termination types, trajectories and motives
Planning alliance termination
Alliance termination: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Nokia–Microsoft
124
124
129
131
134
135
Contents
vii
10
Supplier alliances
The supplier alliance challenge
Managing supplier alliances
Supplier alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: NAM–GLT Plus
139
139
142
146
151
151
11
Learning alliances
The learning alliance challenge
Managing learning alliances
Learning alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Holst Centre
156
156
159
164
170
170
12
Co-branding alliances
The co-branding alliance challenge
Managing co-branding alliances
Co-branding alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Heineken–James Bond
173
173
175
181
185
186
13
International alliances
The international alliance challenge
The nature of national culture
Managing international alliances
International alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Damen Shipyards
189
189
191
196
198
203
204
14
Asymmetrical alliances
The asymmetrical alliance challenge
Managing asymmetrical alliances
Asymmetrical alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Disney–Pixar
208
208
211
215
219
219
15
Cross-sector alliances
The cross-sector alliance challenge
Managing cross-sector alliances
Cross-sector alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Marks & Spencer–Oxfam
222
222
226
228
232
232
viii Contents
16
Coopetition alliances
The coopetition alliance challenge
Managing coopetition alliances
Coopetition alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Reckitt Benckiser
236
236
240
244
250
250
17
Multi-partner alliances
The multi-partner alliance challenge
Managing multi-partner alliances
Multi-partner alliances: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Skyteam
253
253
255
259
263
264
18
Alliance portfolios
The meaning of an alliance portfolio
Alliance portfolio governance
Alliance portfolio: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: General Electric
267
267
269
277
281
281
19
Alliance networks
The meaning of an alliance network
Alliance network governance
Alliance network: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: IBM
284
284
286
293
297
297
20
Business ecosystems
The business ecosystem challenge
Business ecosystem attributes
Managing business ecosystems
Business ecosystems: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Apple vs Amazon
300
300
303
309
312
316
317
21
Alliance professionals
Alliance professionals: a unique job
Hierarchical positions and alliance roles
Alliance manager: attributes and competences
Alliance professionals: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Ivan Vogels
320
320
324
327
330
332
333
Contents
ix
22
Alliance teams
The alliance team challenge
Alliance team types
Managing alliance teams
Alliance teams: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Dutch Optics Centre
336
336
337
340
346
349
349
23
Alliance capabilities
The meaning of alliance capabilities
Building and deploying alliance capabilities
Alliance capabilities: decision-making steps
Summary
Case: Philips
352
352
358
360
362
363
24
Alliance mindset
The meaning of alliance mindset
Alliance tensions
Summary
Case: Microsoft
365
365
367
373
374
25
Alliance system
A co-evolutionary view
Drivers of alliance co-evolution
Summary
Case: Oral care appliances
376
376
379
386
386
26
Contemporary alliances
Technological innovation
Societal responsibility
Theoretical implications for strategic alliance management
Summary
Case:Torvald Klaveness
389
389
392
394
396
397
27
Strategic alliance management: science and art
The science of strategic alliance management
The art of strategic alliance management
The future of strategic alliance management
400
401
402
404
Appendix
References
Index
410
415
449
FIGURES
1.1
1.2
2.1
3.1
4.1
5.1
5.2
6.1
7.1
8.1
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
14.1
15.1
16.1
17.1
18.1
18.2
19.1
19.2
20.1
21.1
22.1
22.2
23.1
25.1
27.1
Alliance development stages
Structure of the book
Decision-making steps: alliance strategy formulation
Decision-making steps: alliance partner selection
Decision-making steps: alliance negotiation
Alliance mirror design
Decision-making steps: alliance design
Decision-making steps: alliance launch
Decision-making steps: alliance management
Decision-making steps: alliance evaluation
Decision-making steps: alliance termination
Alliance development framework: supplier alliances
Alliance development framework: learning alliances
Alliance development framework: co-branding alliances
Alliance development framework: international alliances
Alliance development framework: asymmetrical alliances
Alliance development framework: cross-sector alliances
Alliance development framework: coopetition alliances
Alliance development framework: multi-partner alliances
Generic alliance portfolio confgurations
Alliance development framework: alliance portfolios
Alliance network confgurations
Alliance development framework: alliance networks
Alliance development framework: business ecosystems
Decision-making steps: alliance professionals
Alliance multi-team system
Decision-making steps: alliance teams
Decision-making steps: alliance capabilities
Alliance system
Strategic alliance management: science and art
8
11
25
36
49
70
71
86
104
118
131
147
165
182
199
215
229
245
260
274
278
289
293
313
330
345
347
360
383
401
TABLES
1.1
1.2
2.1
2.2
3.1
4.1
5.1
5.2
6.1
6.2
7.1
8.1
8.2
9.1
10.1
10.2
10.3
11.1
11.2
12.1
12.2
13.1
13.2
14.1
14.2
15.1
15.2
16.1
16.2
17.1
Examples of alliances
Advantages and disadvantages of alliances
Prototypical governance modes: make, buy and ally
Theoretical perspectives: alliance formation
Partner ft types
Negotiation strategies and tactics
Non-equity and equity-based arrangements
Contractual clauses
Alliance launch misconceptions
Alliance launch attributes
Four alliance management approaches
Issues with performance metric
Six performance metrics approaches
Theoretical perspectives and alliance termination
Two views on buyer–supplier exchanges
Examples of supplier alliances
Managing supplier alliances
Examples of learning alliances
Managing learning alliances
Examples of co-branding alliances
Managing co-branding alliances
Examples of international alliances
Hofstede’s fve cultural dimensions
Examples of asymmetrical alliances
Managing asymmetrical alliances
Examples of cross-sector alliances
Cross-sector alliance partners
Examples of coopetition alliances
Managing coopetition alliances
Examples of multi-partner alliances
3
5
14
24
32
45
61
65
80
82
93
110
113
128
140
141
143
157
159
174
177
190
192
209
212
223
224
237
241
254
xii Tables
17.2
18.1
18.2
19.1
19.2
20.1
20.2
20.3
20.4
21.1
21.2
22.1
22.2
23.1
23.2
23.3
24.1
24.2
25.1
25.2
26.1
26.2
A.1
Managing multi-partner alliances
Examples of alliance portfolios
Alliance portfolio governance
Examples of alliance networks
Alliance network governance
Examples of business ecosystems
What is a business ecosystem, and not?
Ecosystem types
Business ecosystem management
Alliance professionals job advertisements (excerpts)
Examples of alliance professionals’ roles
Examples of alliance team types
Alliance team management
Alliance capability instruments
Alliance tools
Alliance capability competence levels
Two examples of tensions in alliances
Four key tensions in alliances
Driving and inhibiting forces of alliance adaptation
Four co-evolutionary trajectories
Examples of contemporary alliance arrangements
Contemporary alliances: description and implications
Managerial checklist
256
268
271
285
287
301
304
308
310
321
324
338
341
355
357
359
367
369
377
378
390
395
410
BOXES
1.1
2.1
5.1
5.2
6.1
7.1
7.2
8.1
8.2
9.1
10.1
11.1
12.1
13.1
13.2
14.1
16.1
18.1
21.1
22.1
22.2
23.1
24.1
25.1
26.1
27.1
Alliance segmentation
Some other governance mode explanations
Joint ventures: a separate stream of research
Alliance mirror design
Alliance relaunch
Types of trust
Organizational justice
Development and implementation metrics
Balanced performance metrics in the Dutch shipbuilding industry
The Skoltech project
Global supply chains
Open innovation
Alternative forms of co-branding
High and low context cultures
Market entry governance modes
Small frms and alliances
Competition law
Toyota’s suppliers’ portfolio
ASAP Certifcation
Multi-dimensional conceptualization of alliance teams
Alliance team leadership
Designing an alliance ofce
Alliance mindset: theoretical perspectives
Nexia’s co-evolution
Multi-sided platforms
Suggestions for empirical alliance research
9
16
59
70
88
94
96
112
117
126
146
158
176
195
200
210
246
270
329
339
343
361
370
380
391
408
PREFACE
Since the frst (2012) and second edition (2017) of Strategic Alliance Management, the world has
changed dramatically. Spurred by technological advancements (e.g. cloud computing, artifcial
intelligence, blockchain technology), frms increasingly operate at a global scale. By contrast,
globalization intertwines with an increasing awareness that a frm’s responsibility extends
beyond proft-maximization—frms also have a responsibility to assume ownership of ecological and societal challenges.The common denominator across these developments however
is that strategic alliances are and will remain cornerstones for the (competitive) strategy of
many frms and (non-proft) organizations, enabling them to achieve objectives that otherwise
would be diffcult to realize.To successfully navigate the unknowns of today’s world, organizations resort to traditional alliance management practices, but new alliance constellations
(e.g. purpose-based ecosystems and multi-lateral societal alliances), and thus practices, have
emerged.The alliance landscape is continuously changing and evolving, making strategic alliance management as relevant today as it was 50 years ago.
Like its predecessors, this third edition attempts to synthesize academic insights (traditional and contemporary) with managerial experience via a ‘guided tour’ of various aspects of
strategic alliance management. Building on an academically grounded alliance development
framework, the book elaborates on unique decision-making situations tied to alliance development stages. In light of a burgeoning and expanding feld, the book should be considered as
a foundational work offering deep insights in the fundamentals of strategic alliance management, but not detailing on each new (anecdotic) insight and discovery. Nonetheless, in recognition of the fact that distinct alliance objectives, alliance partners and alliance constellations
constitute unique management challenges, the book also elaborates on these specifc conditions. Furthermore, the ability to create successful alliances, which refects learning about
alliance management and leveraging alliance knowledge inside the company, is an alliance
competence.To provide understanding about such competences, the book looks in detail at
alliance professionals, alliance teams and alliance capabilities, which all contribute to successful
strategic alliance management. Furthermore, we detail on the alliance mindset, suggesting that
successful alliance practices originate alliance managers’ ability to reconcile tensions.Taking a
broader perspective, we also detail on the alliance system and contemporary alliance constellations. The conclusion builds on these insights and offers new avenues for future strategic
Preface
xv
alliance management research. The intended result is a more comprehensive book than has
previously been available, which acknowledges that decision making constitutes a critical success condition.
With regard to this third edition, several amendments to the frst and second editions have
been made. First, the second edition contains two new chapters: Chapter 24 discussing an
alliance manager’s mindset (i.e. tension-based) and Chapter 26 detailing on emerging alliance
constellations (e.g. technological and societal alliances). Second, we reorganized the structure of
the book to present a more coherent story.After the introduction, Chapters 2–9 systematically
introduce the alliance development framework, Chapters 10–12 detail on alliance objectives,
Chapter 13–16 detail on alliance partners, Chapters 17–20 detail on alliance constellations,
Chapters 21–23 detail on alliance competences and Chapters 24–26 detail on alliance challenges before we conclude the book.Third, in addition to new chapters, the academic literature
has been updated where applicable, and some chapters have been rewritten to capture new
insights (e.g. Chapter 20 Business ecosystems). Fourth, we have added new examples to illustrate a chapter’s content, and relatively older cases have been replaced by more recent ones.
This third edition is (again) written with an even-handed appreciation for theory and
practice. Readers possessing management knowledge, combined with the book’s logic, concept and implications, will be able to absorb the information. Readers are assumed to have
a basic understanding of strategic management and organizations, obtained either through
study or experience. Therefore, students participating in advanced courses in graduate and
MBA programmes in business schools will fnd this book useful, as will professionals seeking
a deeper understanding of the subject.
In preparing this book (editions 1–3), the authors have received considerable assistance
from colleagues who provided detailed feedback on our treatment of the academic literature,
alliance experts who reviewed our decision-making steps, students who raised questions, and
executives who provided us with relevant examples. We specifcally acknowledge the companies and alliance managers that have provided insights, examples and feedback on the case
material (editions 1–3). Thanks are due to Pallas Agterberg (Alliander); Ingrid Kylstad and
Morten Skedsmo (Torvald Klaveness); Steven Twait (AstraZeneca); Hans de Roos (KLM);
Frits Zegeling (Grolsch); Rose Verdurmen (TNT); Jaap Lombaers (Holst Centre); Michiel
Jansen, Tako Keja and Alfred Vrieling (NAM); Berry Vetjens, Nathalie van Schie and Erik
Ham (TNO); Ron van Vianen and Peter van Duijn (Hoogendoorn); Ivan Vogels (SAP); Enri
Leufkens (CapGemini); Michael Kaschke (Reckitt Benckiser); Anoop Nathwani (Consortio
Consulting); Henk Raven (Habraken Rutten Advocaten); Justin Philippens (The3); and Bruce
Dönszelmann (KLM).We also thank Peter Simoons and members of the alliance roundtable
for their input to the second and third edition.
We also appreciate the support of staff of the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Nyenrode
University and TNO, who offered us critical refections on earlier drafts of the book.We also
acknowledge Elisabeth Caswell and James Morrison, whose text editing has been invaluable,
as well as Sophia Levine, Rupert Spurrier, Terry Clague, Alexander Krause, Izzy Fitzharris
and Manon Lute, who provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the fnal manuscript.
Although we received much-appreciated support in writing the book, any errors remain the
responsibility of the authors. Enjoy reading.
Brian Tjemkes, Amsterdam
Pepijn Vos,The Hague
Koen Burgers, Nijmegen
1
STRATEGIC ALLIANCE MANAGEMENT
In the early industrial age, frms created value by transforming raw materials into fnished
products.The economy was based primarily on tangible resources—inventory, land, factories, equipment—and a frm could formulate and execute its business strategy by operating
autonomously and interacting with its environment through market transactions. But times
have changed. In the current age, businesses must create and deploy intangible resources,
including employee skills, information technologies and corporate culture, to encourage
innovation, promote sustainability and improve their competitive strength.Value does not
reside in any individual intangible resource, however. Rather, it arises from the entire set
of resources and the strategy that links them. Valuable resources cannot be considered
separately from the organizations in which they are embedded. In turn, to develop and
maintain competitive advantages, many frms turn increasingly to alliances; instead of just
acquiring resources, they enjoy the benefts of combining their own resources with the
assets of others.
Alliances thus have become cornerstones of the competitive strategy of many frms, enabling them to achieve objectives that otherwise would be diffcult to realize.1 For example,
alliances provide frms with an opportunity to increase their innovative capacity, improve
their market response, effectuate corporate social responsibility, achieve effciency and share
investment risks with partner frms.Yet this increased focus on and use of alliances by frms is
paralleled by empirical research that indicates moderate to high alliance failure rates. Extant
academic and professional literature indicates that to reap the benefts from alliances, frms
must overcome internal and external adversities by effciently and effectively managing their
alliances. Even as alliance literature offers a vast amount of theoretical and practical insights
though, it lacks any systematic framework for decision making. Such a framework would be
of great beneft to (novice) alliance professionals by enabling them to manage their alliances
systematically and aim towards success.
Accordingly, the objective of this book is to connect existing theoretical and practical
insights and thereby present a much needed, coherent and academically grounded development framework of strategic alliance management.The framework focuses on unique decision-making situations tied to the management of alliances as they progress from formation
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-1
2
Strategic alliance management
to termination. Our unique alliance development framework is also grounded in theoretical
perspectives (i.e. know-what), supported by practice-oriented decision-making guidelines
(i.e. know-how) and illustrated by real-life alliance cases. It also incorporates both generic
and specifc decision-making situations tied to unique alliance contexts. Before we proceed
to introduce our Alliance Development Framework though, we establish a foundation for this
book in this opening chapter.To this end, we frst outline our book’s scope and provide a clear
defnition of an alliance. In the following two sections, we elaborate on why frms increasingly use alliances as instruments to develop and sustain a competitive advantage, as well as the
causes for alliance failure. In the fnal section, after explaining the need for a book on strategic
alliance management, we present the structure of the book.

The meaning of an alliance
An alliance is a voluntary, long-term, contractual relationship between two or more autonomous and independent organizations (i.e. frms), designed to achieve mutual and individual
objectives by sharing and/or creating resources (Ariño et al. 2001, p. 110; Gulati 1995b).This
defnition encompasses inter-organizational relationships, such as joint ventures, purchase
partnerships, research and development partnerships, co-makerships, co-creation efforts,
multi-partner alliances, public–private partnerships and consortia, but it excludes arrangements such as simple market transactions, mergers and acquisitions. In Table 1.1, we list
examples of alliances consistent with our defnition.
Four important implications derive from this defnition. First, an alliance is an instrument
that frms use to achieve their objectives, ultimately to develop and sustain their competitive
advantage (Ireland et al. 2002).Therefore, alliance management constitutes a strategic activity
within frms. Second, the defnition indicates that an alliance consists of two or more frms
which remain independent organizational entities but connect voluntarily through an alliance contract.Although alliances thus offer frms fexibility in achieving their objectives, they
also represent relatively unstable organizational arrangements because there is an absence of
hierarchical governance (Litwak and Hylton 1962).Third, as critical resources get exchanged,
frms engaged in alliances grow increasingly dependent on each other to realize their joint
and individual objectives.This situation implies that frms must manage their alliances proactively to resolve any tension between cooperative forces focused on value creation and competitive forces oriented towards value appropriation (Dyer et al. 2008). Fourth, our defnition
implies that alliances are transitional entities because frms can dissolve them at any convenient time.The threat of premature termination requires systematic management attention to
resolve any emerging adversities.
Compared with other organizational entities, such as stand-alone organizations, alliances
thus represent unique arrangements with specifc management challenges (Albers et al. 2016).
For example, interdependent parties in alliances must develop joint business propositions,
share control and management, accept overlapping roles and responsibilities, engage in adaptation through mutual cooperation, install internal and proactive monitoring mechanisms and
develop long-term incentive systems. However, parallel to cooperation, competition between
the partners exists because partners simultaneously compete with one another to attain individual objectives, occasionally at the expense of their counterparts. In other words, if alliances
are relatively unstable and complex entities, the question emerges: why do frms engage in
alliance activity?

Strategic alliance management
3
TABLE 1.1 Examples of alliances
Company
Description
DSM
DSM establishes a number of partnerships for its Pharma and Bulk Chemicals activities
in order to streamline and simplify its core portfolio in Nutrition and Performance
Materials. In 2011, DSM established a 50/50 joint venture with Sinochem to develop,
produce and sell pharmaceutical ingredients and fnished dosages. In 2015, DSM
formed ChemicaInvest, a new joint venture (35% equity) with CVC Capital Partners.
ChemicaInvest is a global leader in the production and supply of caprolactam and the
leading European supplier of acrylonitrile and composite resins. In 2022, DSM and
the World Food Programme (WFP) agreed to extend their partnership and scale up
rice fortifcation worldwide.The partnership will seek to improve the availability and
accessibility of nutritious foods in order to reach vulnerable people.

IBM
IBM forges a number of global partnerships to achieve economies of scale and
scope, enhance its innovative capability and support its global footprint and market
leadership. In 2014, IBM and Twitter forged a global partnership, integrating Twitter
data with IBM analytics services, to enrich cloud services for clients, to deliver a set
of enterprise applications to help improve business decisions across industries and
professions and to enrich consulting services for clients across business. In 2015,
IBM and Box announced a global partnership that would combine the best-inclass technologies of both companies to create simple and secure IT (cloud-based)
solutions. In 2016, IBM and Teva expanded their existing global e-Health alliance
with a focus on the discovery of new treatment options and improving chronic disease
management. Both projects will run on the IBM Watson Health Cloud.

Walmart
Walmart has revolutionized the way retail companies manage relationships and
partnerships within the supply chain.Walmart shares its vast trove of real-time sales data
with the frms that stock its shelves and even goes so far as to create large teams to work
with partners to streamline costs. In addition,Walmart forges partnerships to effectuate a
positive change with regards to risks and social issues in consumer goods supply chains.
Walmart is a founding member of the Alliance for Bangladesh Worker Safety, a group of
brands and retailers seeking to drive safer working conditions for the men and women
in the ready-made garment industry. In 2014,Walmart joined the Fair Food programme
through a partnership with the Coalition of Immokalee Workers (CIW) and Florida
tomato suppliers.The Global Social Compliance Programme (GSCP) is a businessdriven programme created to promote the continuous improvement of working
and environment conditions in global supply chains.Walmart is one of fve leading
companies that helped to create GSCP. In 2021,Walmart and Netfix partnered up to
bring products celebrating some of the streaming service’s most popular kids’ shows to
store shelves across the country in a partnership they’re calling the Netfix Hub.

Sources: DSM (2016, 2022); IBM (2016); Walmart (2016, 2021).

Alliance activity
Alliances are critical weapons in frms’ competitive arsenals, and in recent decades, alliance
activity has increased substantially (Duysters et al. 2012; Gomes et al. 2016; Bamford et al.
2022). According to Kang and Sakai (2001), the number of alliances in 1999 was six times
higher than a decade before. Duysters et al. (1999) report a similar exponential increase in
strategic technology alliances during the period 1970–1996, and Anand and Khanna (2000)
4
Strategic alliance management
count, during 1990–1993, more than 9,000 alliances just in the US manufacturing sector.
On the basis of their research, Dyer et al. (2001) conclude that in 2001, the top 500 global
businesses averaged 60 major alliances each. De Man (2005) reports the number of alliances
by high-tech companies during the period 1998–2002: IBM (168), Cisco (56), Eli Lilly (40)
and Philips–EU (61). Furthermore, the impact of alliances appears to be growing steadily. As
Harbison and Pekar (1998) fnd, the percentage of the annual revenue of the 1,000 largest
US companies earned from alliances grew from less than 2 per cent in 1980 to 19 per cent
by 1996 and was expected to reach 35 per cent by 2002.With respect to predictions for the
future, survey research indicates that managers consider alliances primary vehicles for growth
(Schifrin 2001). Banks, for example, are becoming more open to the idea of partnering with
startups to push their growth strategy forward. Between 2013 and 2014, a 200 per cent jump
in the value of US fntech (partnership) deals was observed (Accenture 2016). Results from
the Global CEO Survey indicate that 49 per cent of the participating CEOs will forge an
alliance/joint venture agreement in 2016, compared to 51 per cent in 2015, and 44 per cent
in 2014 (PWC 2016). Analysis of the 96 largest companies in the world, across eight industries, shows that new partnership formations are surging worldwide, up 173 per cent in 2021
compared to 2020 (Bamford et al. 2022). Moreover, in a post-pandemic world, alliances and
ecosystems (in addition to mergers and acquisitions) are considered critical instruments to
grow, create competitive advantage and be disruptive (Macmillan et al. 2022).These illustrations imply that frms cannot create value on a stand-alone basis; the way business is conducted today is based on partnerships (for more alliance examples see Turiera and Cros 2013).
The rationales for engaging in alliances shift with economic and industry developments
(Doz and Hamel 1998). During the 1970s for example, frms focused on product performance (i.e. effciency and quality) and engaged in alliances to obtain access to technology
and new domestic and international markets, as well as to realize market stability. During the
1980s, the focus shifted to obtaining fexible market positions as continuing globalization,
increasing competition and more demanding customers required frms to become fexible.
Their alliances provided fexibility, deployed to build industry stature, consolidate industry
positions and gain economies of scale and scope. Then during the 1990s and 2000s, frms
switched their attention to learning and capability development for innovation; they began
using alliances to ensure a constant stream of prospects for advancing technology and to proactively maximize value, optimize their total cost for product or customer segments and gain
an ability to respond to changing internal and external conditions. More recent upsurges in
alliance activity appear triggered by a focus on corporate social responsibility: alliances help
frms comply with institutional and market demands for societal and ecological responsibility.
Also, new alliance-based organizational arrangements (e.g. ecosystem, meta-organizations)
have emerged in response to technological advances. Regardless of the rationale, though, the
strategic value of alliances is apparent, especially in a contemporary context of rapidly growing and changing markets, global competition, network organizations and dynamic, complex,
expensive technologies.
Today alliances represent strategic instruments that offer various advantages (see Table 1.2).
Firms enter alliances to access valuable and complementary resources they do not already
possess (Das and Teng 2000b), including capital, technology and specialized knowledge. To
expand product volume and achieve economies of scale, frms also establish partnerships. Furthermore, they might engage in alliances to reduce operational and strategic risks, accelerate
internal growth or increase speed to market. Alliances also can function as learning vehicles,
providing a means to obtain, exchange and harvest knowledge (Lubatkin et al. 2001).They can
Strategic alliance management
5
even shift external dependencies to the frm’s advantage by blocking competitors or inducing
group-to-group competition (Gimeno 2004). If an alliance offers legitimacy and reputation
effects (Stuart 2000), it can reinforce the frm’s corporate social responsibility policies and lobbying activities (London et al. 2006; Yin and Jamali 2021). Finally, alliances offer a way to assess
potential acquisition partners (Hagedoorn and Sadowski 1999), in that shared experiences
reduce the costs related to integration.Thus, alliances provide more fexibility than hierarchies
or markets and are subject to less regulation than mergers and acquisitions.

TABLE 1.2 Advantages and disadvantages of alliances
Advantages
Disadvantages
• Access to resources: frms form alliances to
gain access to capital, specialized skills, market
and technological knowledge, or production
facilities, which can help them focus on core
competences.
• Economies of scale: high fxed costs require
frms to collaborate to expand production
volume.
• Risk and cost sharing: alliances enable
frms to share the risk and cost of particular
investments.
• Access to a (foreign) market: partnering with
another frm is often the only way to obtain
access to a (foreign) market.
• Learning and innovation: alliances offer frms
an opportunity to learn from their partners;
for example, lean manufacturing, product
development, management know-how or
technology capabilities.
• Speed to market: frms with complementary
skills collaborate to increase speed to market
and capture frst-mover advantages.
• Reputation: frms form alliances to increase
their reputation and legitimization. Lobbying
activities and collective pressure prompt
governments to adopt policies that favour
specifc industries.
• Neutralizing or blocking competitors: frms
can gain competencies and market power to
neutralize or block the moves of a competitor
(e.g. entry barriers).
• Assessing acquisition partner: alliances offer a
way to know a potential acquisition candidate
better and decrease information asymmetry.
• Flexibility: alliances provide more fexibility
than hierarchies and markets and are
subject to less regulation than mergers and
acquisitions.

• Loss of proprietary information: proprietary
information can be lost to a partner who is a
competitor or eventually will become one.
• Management complexities: because alliances
require the combined effort of multiple frms,
they entail coordination complexities, often
resulting in conficts, frustrations and costly
delays.
• Financial and organizational risks: the
opportunistic behaviour of partners can
undermine the value creation logic of
an alliance. Inter-organizational routines
also may make it diffcult for a frm to act
independently.
• Risk of becoming dependent: a power
imbalance arises if one partner becomes
overly dependent on the other.This situation
increases the risk of opportunism, exploitation
and (hostile) acquisitions.
• Loss of decision autonomy: joint planning
and decision making may result in a loss of
decision-making autonomy and control.
• Loss of fexibility: establishing an alliance with
one partner may prevent partnerships with
other potential frms.
• Antitrust implications: the benefts of
alliances disappear if they are challenged on
antitrust grounds. Some countries have strict
regulations that prohibit certain business
relationships.
• Learning barriers: although alliances provide
access to knowledge, learning barriers may
make it diffcult to integrate and exploit new
knowledge.
• Long-term viability: despite predetermined
objectives and end dates, internal and
external contingencies often cause premature
termination.

Source:Adapted from Barringer and Harrison (2000).

6
Strategic alliance management
However, alliance activity creates several disadvantages. For example, frms may lose
proprietary information to a competitor, which weakens their competitive advantage (Kale
et al. 2000); the managerial complexities due to reciprocal and interdependent relationships may create substantial coordination costs that jeopardize joint value creation (Gulati
and Singh 1998); their voluntarily collaboration increases the risk of opportunistic conduct, which undermines value appropriation efforts (Wathne and Heide 2000); frms can
become locked into a relationship, reducing their bargaining power; and the loss of decision autonomy could inhibit the frm’s ability to steer the alliance towards its own objectives (Glaister et al. 2003), just as the loss of organizational fexibility may restrain its ability
to pursue alternative, potentially more valuable arrangements. Furthermore, laws and regulations often inhibit an alliance’s potential (Oxley 1999), and inter-frm learning may be
diffcult due to learning barriers that limit a frm’s absorptive capacity (Hamel 1991).
Finally, unforeseen internal and external contingencies constitute a threat to long-term
stability (Das and Teng 2000a).

Alliance failure
Paradoxically, even as frms increase their focus on and use of alliances, their failure rates seem
to keep climbing (Hoang and Rothaermel 2005; Pekar and Allio 1994). Researchers report
failure rates as high as 70 per cent (Harrigan 1988), though in other settings, Franko (1971)
and Killing (1983) fnd 24 and 30 per cent premature alliance dissolutions, respectively. Porter
(1987) considers 33 randomly chosen US frms, a sample that produced a dissolution rate of
50.3 per cent during 1950–1986. Kok and Wildeman (1997) and Dacin et al. (1997) calculate approximately 60 per cent failure rates for alliances, whereas Park and Ungson (1997)
fnd a dissolution rate of 43 per cent during 1979–1995 among a US–Japanese sample. De
Man (2005) reports an average failure rate of 52 per cent for a sample of 140 European and
US frms. Based on a repetitive study among alliance professionals (i.e. 2002, 2007, 2009,
2011), Duysters (2012) and colleagues conclude that the alliance failure rates remain stable at
approximately 50 per cent.These reports in combination confrm that even if frms consider
alliances attractive methods to achieve their objectives, they are subject to widespread failure
and premature dissolution.
A plethora of factors contribute to or inhibit the achievement of superior performance
(Hoffmann and Schlosser 2001; Nemeth and Nippa 2013; Robson et al. 2002; RyanCharleton et al. 2022). For example, the success or failure of alliances might be attributed to
environmental contingencies (Koza and Lewin 1998), the cultural distance between partners
(Barkema et al. 1996), broad or narrow alliance scopes (Khanna 1998), the alliance contract
(Hagedoorn and Hesen 2007), the governance form adopted (Sampson 2004a), emerging
alliance instability (Das and Teng 2000a), management control (Yan and Gray 1994), the
quality of the working relationship (Ariño et al. 2001) or learning processes (Lane et al. 2001).
We postulate that whereas premature dissolution results from mismanagement and ad hoc
decision making, alliance success stems from the adoption of a systematic approach to alliance
management.
Specifically, we address three key reasons that encompass this plethora of potential
deal breakers. First, failure stems from a lack of understanding of the potential pitfalls
and hazards that pertain to the different alliance development stages. Alliances typically develop through a sequence of stages, and during each, partner firms direct their
Strategic alliance management
7
attention to specific design and management decisions. For example, during the alliance
strategy formulation stage, decisions should focus on developing a business proposition
and selecting an appropriate governance mode (i.e. make, buy or ally). But during the
alliance management stage, decisions instead must focus on the day-to-day operations.
Second, failure can be attributed to an unawareness of the unique challenges imposed on
them by different alliance objectives, diverging partner firm characteristics and unique
alliance contexts. For example, whereas learning alliances require firms to focus on
knowledge sharing and protection mechanisms, co-branding alliances necessitate that
they direct their attention towards reputation management.Third, alliance failure is more
likely when firms neglect the institutionalization of their alliance know-how and knowwhat—which we refer to as alliance capabilities. For example, firms that possess strong
alliance capabilities, implying that they have invested in an alliance function, databases
and checklists, tend to outperform firms without these capabilities. Moreover, firms
employing alliance professionals who possess an ‘alliance mindset’ are more likely to
experience success.
To reap the benefts from alliances, frms must deal systematically with these three issues,
which will enable them to achieve, effciently and effectively, a good design and management approach to their alliance relationships. Observing the high failure rates in practice, it
seems, however, that frms are not suffciently prepared.Therefore, we need an academically
grounded framework that offers a coherent understanding of the unique nature of strategic
alliance management.

An academically grounded alliance development framework
Before and during alliance development, managers confront varied, unique decision-making situations. Each situation requires that frms conceptualize it in terms of problem,
solutions and implementation. That is, frms must tackle any situation by defning the
problem, developing a set of solutions, selecting one solution, and then implementing it
effciently and effectively.To this end, they need to be aware of decision-making rationales,
that is, the underlying principles, guidelines and theories that may inform their decision.
Academic research is rife with theories that attempt to explain these decision-making
rationales; we draw on theories from alliance literature to discuss the decision-making
content, the alternatives, and the theoretical rationales for these various alternatives. In
addition, decision makers in frms must understand the necessary steps for arriving at an
appropriate solution, which we refer to as decision-making steps. Management literature
is informative in this context. By combining these varied concepts and research streams,
we propose an academically grounded framework for strategic alliance management that
consists of three main parts: (1) alliance development stages, (2) alliance attributes and
(3) alliance competences.

Alliance development stages
The foundation details the development stages through which alliances progress. Building on
prior alliance development literature (D’Aunno and Zuckerman 1987; Das and Teng 2002;
Dyer et al. 2001; Kanter 1994), we distinguish eight stages: (1) alliance strategy formulation,
(2) alliance partner selection, (3) alliance negotiation, (4) alliance design, (5) alliance launch,
8
Strategic alliance management
(6) alliance management, (7) alliance evaluation and (8) alliance termination (see Figure 1.1).
Each development stage depicts a specifc decision-making situation that requires unique
know-what and know-how (see Box 1.1 for other segmentation approaches). An alliance
transforms and proceeds to the next stage only after it has achieved the objectives of the
preceding stage.Thus, each development stage is characterized by specifc issues and requires
specifc decision-making rationales and steps.

1
Alliance strategy
formulation
A firm must decide whether a market exchange, internal growth, a
merger or acquisition, or an alliance depicts the most viable option to
achieve its objectives. If a firm decides to opt for an alliance, it should
formulate an alliance strategy.

2
Alliance partner
selection
A firm must identify a suitable partner that can help them to realize its
objectives. After a systematic search and selection process, a firm
formulates a short list of potential partners, and using partner selection
criteria, it choose its definitive alliance partner.

3
Alliance negotiation
Partners negotiate the collaborative scheme by using negotiation
strategies and tactics. Negotiators discuss contributions, compensation
and coordination issues, and if consensus is achieved, the partnership is
formalized in an alliance agreement.

4
Alliance design
Design the alliance by selecting governance form, formulating
contractual provisions and by deciding on management control
mechanisms. It is a critical stage because it prescribes how and in which
conditions the alliance is executed.

5
Alliance launch
The alliance becomes operational. The alliance launch team effectuates
the alliance agreement, installs alliance governance, sets achievable
short-term milestones and promotes a collaborative climate; activities
which together constitute a basis for alliance management and growth.

6
Alliance
management
Alliance management takes over responsibility and starts to coordinate
day-to-day processes. Decisions relate to governance, monitoring,
communication, interpartner learning, responding to adversities,
modifications and building hig h-quality working relationships.

7
Alliance evaluation
Design and implement a performance metric system. Based on joint
and/or individual assessments, decide whether alliance objectives,
alliance design and/or alliance management require adaptations .
Alternatively, they could decide to exit the alliance.

8
Alliance termination
Alliance structures have a limited lifetime; in principle, all alliances
must be terminated at some point in time. Formulate a termination plan
and make decisions pertaining to extracting value, reducing possible
losses and protecting reputations.

FIGURE 1.1
Alliance development stages
Strategic alliance management
9
BOX 1.1 ALLIANCE SEGMENTATION
Alliance segmentation entails an approach to distinguish between diferent types of
alliance relationships. Segmentation is academically relevant to clarify the object of
the study and organize theory and empirical evidence systematically. In this book, for
example, we use various alliance segmentation approaches, including alliance development (e.g. design versus management), alliance objectives (e.g. learning versus cobranding), partner characteristics (e.g. cross-sector versus competition) and governance
forms (e.g. equity versus non-equity). Whereas the academic segmentations outlined in
this book are critical to alliance professionals as it helps them to organize and focus their
attention, in practice, other segmentations do exist. For example, alliance leadership
may organize a set of alliance relationships based on the extent to which a partner holds
promise for the future and the extent to which this partner is strategically important to
the frm. Consequently, four alliance types are distinguished. First, a corporate alliance
is strategically important and holds a key to future success. These relationships require
extant managerial attention as often multiple ties exist with a (rival) partner, including
supplier, learning and customer relationships. In addition to exploiting existing and
joint resource combinations, innovation is often part of the long-term agenda. Second,
a business alliance entails a single-tie relationship, exhibiting low strategic importance
and low potential for future synergies. Such a relationship extends beyond a mere
transactional exchange, and alliance management is relatively straightforward with a
focus on monitoring relationship progress and attaining objectives. Third, relationship
alliances hold great promise for the future, as for example joint research and development eforts may lead to marketable innovations. However, the present strategic value
is low, thus alliance management should primarily focus attention on unlocking the
relationship’s potential. Fourth, strategic alliances are of critical importance to the frm
as, for example, a partner may provide access to a unique distribution channel or supply
a critical component. Even if future synergies are unlikely, relationship continuation is
imperative. Depending on the nature and objectives of the frm, other pragmatic segmentation approaches, for example, based on the extent of integration, the extent of
learning or the extent of equity, may be more suited and managerially efective.

Alliances are, however, purposeful entities that can learn and adapt to changing circumstances, indicating that alliance development also entails a repetitive sequence of goal formulation, implementation and modifcation based on lessons learned or changed intentions
among the partner frms (Ariño and de la Torre 1998).The alliance development framework
incorporates a cyclical approach, such that the eight stages remain interlinked through learning and adaptation.All decisions made in one stage have effects on subsequent stages, and alliance development can follow an iterative development path, such that stages may be revisited
if needed. Alliance failure often results when organizations skip one or more stages and/or
managers fail to complete their decision-making tasks for each development stage. Management thus plays a critical role (i.e. decision making) in successful alliances, as organizations
must be actively managed and guided through various stages to increase chances for success.

10
Strategic alliance management
Chapters 2 to 9 present the foundation of our alliance development framework and detail,
for each development stage, the content and steps associated with decision-making situations. Before engaging in an alliance, a frm must conduct a strategic analysis to determine
the appropriate governance mode (Chapter 2). A frm then conducts a partner analysis to
select an appropriate partner (Chapter 3). Building on these two pre-design stages, the frm
starts alliance negotiations (Chapter 4), with the result that the outcomes of the negotiations
are formalized in an alliance design (Chapter 5), which provides the foundation for alliance
launch (Chapter 6) and alliance management (Chapter 7). As the alliance develops, performance assessments are required to monitor the relationship’s progress (Chapter 8), and the
frm must manage the alliance dissolution too (Chapter 9).

Alliance attributes
Because each alliance is surrounded by unique circumstances, we augment our framework by
elaborating on unique decision-making situations originating in unique alliance attributes.
Distinct alliance objectives, alliances with different types of partners and specifc alliance
constellations are likely to require idiosyncratic know-what and know-how, so we must offer
more detail in our framework. We frst focus on alliance objectives and their management
challenges, as distinct alliance objectives impose constraints on decision making within each
alliance development stage. We give detail on supplier alliances (Chapter 10), learning alliances (Chapter 11) and co-branding alliances (Chapter 12). In addition, the impact of partner
characteristics on decision making is discussed, as diverging philosophies, orientations and
backgrounds between partners constitute a potential barrier to effective decision making.
We detail international alliances (Chapter 13), asymmetrical alliances (Chapter 14), crosssector alliances (Chapter 15) and coopetition alliances (Chapter 16). Alliance arrangements
also come in constellations composed of more than two alliance partners. Unique alliance
constellations bring about unique decision-making challenges. Specifc attention is given
to multi-partner alliances (Chapter 17), alliance portfolios (Chapter 18), alliance networks
(Chapter 19) and business ecosystems (Chapter 20). Other alliance objectives, partner characteristics and alliance constellations may affect strategic alliance management as well, but we
suggest that taken together, these chapters present a coherent overview covering a wide-range
of topics.All chapters are replete with illustrative case descriptions.

Alliance competence
The ability to create successful alliances, which refects learning about alliance management
and then leveraging alliance knowledge within the company, constitutes an alliance capability.To build alliance capabilities, organizations must not only learn and manage alliances but
also exploit their own alliance competences appropriately. Firms that capitalize on their prior
experience with alliances likely develop and deploy their alliance capabilities and, therefore,
tend to outperform frms without alliance experience or capabilities.Another critical element
of a frm’s alliance competence pertains to the selection, training and management of people
involved in alliance relationships; thus we detail the role and competences of alliance professionals (Chapter 21) and explicate how partner representatives may work together in alliance
teams (Chapter 22) before we defne alliance capabilities, detail why they are important, and
describe decision making in terms of building and deploying alliance capabilities (Chapter 23).

Strategic alliance management
11
Alliance challenges
Whereas Chapters 2–23 offer instrumental knowledge about strategic alliance management,
we acknowledge that high-performing alliances require more than pre-set solutions. A manager’s experience, expertise and creativity contribute to developing an alliance mindset. An
alliance mindset refers to the cognitive frame alliance managers use to identify and deal with
tensions with alliance arrangements, including cooperative versus competitive, structure versus process, deliberate versus emergent and corporate versus societal tensions.We provide an
Chapter 1
Strategic alliance management
Alliance Development Stages
Chap. 2 Alliance strategy formulation
Chap. 3 Alliance partner selection
Chap. 4 Alliance negotiation
Chap. 5 Alliance design
Chap. 6 Alliance launch
Chap. 7 Alliance management
Chap. 8 Alliance evaluation
Chap. 9 Alliance termination
Alliance Objectives
Alliance Partners
Alliance Constellations
Chap. 10 Supplier alliances
Chap. 11 Learning alliances
Chap. 12 Co-branding alliances
Chap. 13 International alliances
Chap. 14 Asymmetrical alliances
Chap. 15 Cross-sector alliances
Chap. 16 Coopetition alliances
Chap. 17 Multi-partner alliance
Chap. 18 Alliance portfolios
Chap. 19 Alliance networks
Chap. 20 Business ecosystems
Alliance Competence
Chap. 21 Alliance professionals
Chap. 22 Alliance teams
Chap. 23 Alliance capabilities
Alliance Challenges
Chap. 24 Alliance mindset
Chap. 25 Alliance system
Chap. 26 Contemporary alliances
Chapter 27
Strategic alliance management:
science and art
FIGURE 1.2
Structure of the book
12
Strategic alliance management
understanding of how managers can identify and resolve these alliance tensions (Chapter 24).
In addition, understanding the interplay between partner frm, alliance and external environment poses a challenge which needs to be understood to successfully steer alliances towards
success.We detail on a co-evolutionary approach, which at the core approaches alliance management from a system perspective (Chapter 25). Undeniably, alliances constitute the cornerstone of frms’ competitive strategy. Not surprisingly, new forms of alliance arrangements are
created and effectuated. Accounting for technological, ecological and sociological developments, we detail on new alliance forms, among which include Industry 4.0 alliances, blockchain alliances, environmental collaborations and societal alliances (Chapter 26).
In Chapter 27, we postulate that, in addition to being a Science, strategic alliance management constitutes an Art.We conclude the book with themes likely to become salient to the
future of strategic alliance management.Taken together, this book takes readers on a guided
tour of strategic alliance management, as we depict in Figure 1.2.

Note
1 The main focus of the book is on business, hence we use the label ‘frm’ or ‘organization’ if a broader
context is implied.The insights offered in this book, however, also apply to other organization forms,
including non-proft and non-governmental organizations.

2
ALLIANCE STRATEGY FORMULATION
During the alliance strategy formulation stage, a frm decides which governance mode is
appropriate for realizing its objectives, that is, how it will organize the procurement of its
desired resources. We distinguish three prototypical types: ‘make’, such that frms gather
resources internally through inter-unit exchanges or through mergers and acquisitions;‘buy’,
which means frms procure resources through discrete market transactions organized by simple contracts; and ‘ally’, which refers to alliance arrangements organized through complex
contracts with external parties to procure resources. This chapter is divided as follows. To
inform their decisions about alliance strategy formulation, managers must understand the difference between alternative governance modes (frst section) and comprehend the rationales
underpinning each of them (second section).When a frm adopts the ally governance mode,
it also must formulate an alliance strategy to detail the requirements that the alliance should
meet. We therefore wind up this chapter with three sections describing a set of decisionmaking steps, a summary for alliance strategy formulation and a case illustration.

Three prototypical governance modes
In the context of governance modes, a frm’s boundary pertains to its demarcation from its
external environment, though these boundaries are constantly subject to change as frms
rearrange their portfolios of activities to achieve their objectives. Such restructuring occurs
through three types of prototypical governance modes that defne exchanges and that we
compare in Table 2.1: make, buy and ally1 (Gulati and Nickerson 2008).
The ‘make’ governance mode indicates that frms seek to realize their objectives through
internal procurement (Gulati and Nickerson 2008). For example, in inter-unit exchanges,
frms autonomously invest in and develop their existing resources and capabilities to market
their products and services. Prior to their internal procurement though, some frms internalize previously external resources by engaging in mergers and acquisitions. In such a transaction, two frms agree to integrate their operations because they possess resources that, when
combined, create synergies. Through internal procurement, organizations obtain property
rights and thus a competitive advantage because they can develop products and services out
of sight of competitors. In this case, they also might attain control over their margins and
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-2
14
Make
Buy
Ally
Form
Internal growth
Merger and acquisition
Market
Alliance
Description
Activities and resources
developed internally
Activities and resources
internalized through a transaction
in which two frms agree to merge
Activities and resources
procured through a market
transaction
Access to activities and resources
obtained through collaboration
with external frm(s)
Coordination
Hierarchy
Hierarchy
Price
Relational (supplemented with
hierarchical and price)
Characteristics
• No or limited
interdependencies with
external organizations
• Full control over resources
• Relatively few
interdependencies with external
organizations after integration
• Full control over resources
• Low interdependencies
with external organizations
• Full control over resources
• High interdependencies with
external organizations
• Partial control over all resources
Advantages
• Proprietary rights and
ownership
• Protecting and building
competences
• Adaptation to internal and
external demands
•
•
•
•
Quick access to similar markets
Authority over activity
Tax benefts
Small impact on industry
capacity
• Building competences
• Quick access to
commodities
• Effcient information
processing
• High-powered incentives
• Quick access to complementary
resources
• Speed and fexibility
• Shared investments and risks
Downside
• Slow and costly development
• Uncertainty
• Limited growth and expansion
• Required fnances
• Complex negotiation and
integration challenges
• Bureaucracy
• Loss of fexibility and high risk
• High failure costs
• High transaction costs due
to market failure
• High uncertainty
• Inseparability of resources
• Information asymmetries
• Subject to market power
•
•
•
•
•
Sources: Gulati and Nickerson (2008); Powell (1990);Williamson (1991).

Shared returns
Lack of control
Questionable long-term viability
Diffcult to integrate learning
Need for performance
monitoring
Alliance strategy formulation
TABLE 2.1 Prototypical governance modes: make, buy and ally
Alliance strategy formulation
15
markets. However, the ‘make’ decision imposes hazards on the frm in that it might increase
the level of bureaucracy because the frm has full control over an activity (Williamson 1991).
It also reduces fexibility; building or integrating new resources requires substantial investments, which may be diffcult to recoup if the frm fails.
The ‘buy’ governance mode instead implies that frms procure resources through discrete
market transactions, organized in the form of a simple contract. Market transactions are well
suited to exchanging commodities because ‘supply and demand’ governs the exchange. The
exchange is organized by price (Powell 1990), so the level of organizational and fnancial integration between the transacting frms is low. Because markets process information effciently,
buyers gain good access to different types of relevant information, including prices, alternative
suppliers and quality. However, market transactions also involve potential hazards. The main
disadvantage of the ‘buy’ governance mode therefore pertains to the opposing objectives of
the transacting organizations: the buying frm aims to lower costs, whereas the selling organization hopes to increase revenues. The confict may induce opportunistic behaviour and
increase transaction costs. Furthermore, markets may fail in response to the uncertainty surrounding the supply of resources, information asymmetries between buyers and suppliers may
result in higher prices and suppliers may use their market power to increase their margins.
Finally, the third governance mode,‘ally’, suggests that frms establish alliances with external parties to obtain access to desired resources. Alliances provide a viable alternative when
internal and external conditions lead the frm to desire some degree of control over the
resources but not to internalize them. For example, when markets fail, frms may use an
alliance to obtain access to external resources. Alliances offer several advantages: an alliance
governance mode enables a frm to access complementary resources without obtaining proprietary rights. It provides the frm with speed and fexibility in obtaining access and exploiting desired resources. Furthermore, through collaborations, frms can share investments, which
may reduce risk. However, sharing resources may also impose the risk of creating increased
competition. Furthermore, it may be diffcult to integrate learning into the frm, and the
long-term viability of an alliance is questionable.When partners have reaped the benefts from
the relationship, they are then likely to terminate it.
The three governance modes offer alternative strategic options for building and sustaining
a competitive advantage. However, it is also important to note the plethora of intermediate
governance forms on the make–buy continuum (Powell 1990). For example, alliances constitute a hybrid governance mode between hierarchy and market exchanges, whereas joint ventures (i.e. where two frms establish a new organizational entity) tend to verge on hierarchical
governance. In contrast, licence agreements are more closely associated with market exchange.
Despite these varied intermediate forms, the logic for choosing a governance mode can rely
mainly on the three prototypical types.

Governance mode rationales
Numerous theoretical perspectives permeate alliance literature, providing rationales for cooperative strategies and governance mode decisions (Salvato et al. 2017). Contingent on a theory’s assumptions and related key constructs, each theory provides alternative explanations.
For reasons of parsimony (see Box 2.1 for other perspectives), we focus here on seven theoretical perspectives that tend to dominate alliance literature: (1) transaction cost economics,
(2) resource-based view, (3) resource dependence perspective, (4) strategic management theory,
(5) social network theory, (6) organizational learning perspective and (7) institutional theory.

16
Alliance strategy formulation
BOX 2.1 SOME OTHER GOVERNANCE MODE EXPLANATIONS
Extending beyond more established theoretical perspectives, such as transaction cost
economics, resource-based view and institutional theory, other theoretical perspectives
have been introduced to the alliance feld. Real options represent a frm’s investment
in assets, which allow the frm to respond to future events in a contingent fashion. Initial work by Kogut (1991)—advocating that the establishment of a joint venture (JV)
depicts a real option decision—laid the foundation of a series of studies drawing on
real options theory (see Reuer and Tong 2005). These studies investigated topics such
as the initiation of equity arrangements as option purchases, valuations of JV terminations, risk implications of JV investments and conditions under which real options are
used in JVs. More recent, one ramifcation of real options theory extends to alliance
management and details on the extent to which (real) options can be identifed and
exploited (Berard and Perez 2014). Real options theory thus explicates how alliance
decisions could be viewed as a way to attain risk reduction in the present by having
a right but not the obligation to undertake future investments and to capitalize on
emerging opportunities. Agency theory is concerned with the governance mechanisms
that organize the relationship between principals (e.g. shareholders) and agents (e.g.
board), as these parties inherently have conficting interests and access to diferent sets
of information. According to agency theory, a tension exists between principals having
a need to impose control and agents acting within their own interest, a tension which
can be resolved, for example, by contracts. Within an alliance setting, agency theory is
used to explain joint venture investment decisions, and empirical evidence suggests that
the presence of agency hazards afects frms’ decisions to opt for equity-based arrangements (Reuer and Ragozzino 2005). It also stipulates that efective alliance decision
making and relationships result from imposing monitoring and incentive systems that
align alliance managers’ interests (i.e. agents) with owners’ interests (i.e. principals).
Sources: Berard and Perez (2014); Kogut (1991); Reuer and Ragozzino (2005); Reuer
and Tong (2005); Wang (2015).

Transaction cost economics (TCE)
TCE offers a coherent framework for exploring choices of governance modes (Williamson 1975, 1991). It stresses effciency and cost minimization rationales for cooperation and
advances insights by recognizing the role of partners’ motives, the nature of the investments
and the specifc character of the transactions. It states that transaction costs should be minimized when a governance mode matches the transaction exchange conditions.These costs of
running the economic system include both ex-ante and ex-post costs (Williamson 1985).The
ex-ante costs relate mainly to drafting, negotiating and safeguarding a contractual agreement,
whereas the ex-post costs entail the time and resources invested in repairing misalignments
and bonding. In this sense, transaction costs differ from production costs, which are generated
from the primary functions of the organization, that is, producing goods and services.

Alliance strategy formulation
17
Two assumptions and three exchange conditions constitute the core of TCE logic.The frst
assumption involves opportunism, or behaviour that is self-interested and deceptive.The logic
thus holds that managers are inclined to break, whether implicitly and explicitly, the rules that
govern a transaction. A second assumption refers to bounded rationality. That is, despite the
frm’s efforts to deal with complexity and unpredictability, managers have only limited ability to plan for the future and predict various contingencies that may arise.The potential for
opportunistic behaviour and the constraints of bounded rationality pose severe problems for
governing transactions because they drive transaction costs higher and require frms to protect
themselves against exploitation.Accordingly,TCE predicts that distinct transactions with variations in frequency, asset specifcity and uncertainty demand alternative governance modes
to be organized effciently. Frequency refers to the number of exchanges that constitute the
transaction. Asset specifcity occurs when investments specifcally support an exchange relationship, such that if the relationship were to be terminated, the value of these assets would be
largely lost. Finally, uncertainty implies that the consequences of a situation are unpredictable.
If market transactions dominate, exchanges are likely to be straightforward and nonrepetitive and require few transaction-specifc investments. In such conditions, the market
itself, backed by contract law, can provide effective safeguards. However, if transactions
produce uncertain outcomes, recur frequently and require substantial investments (i.e.
asset specifcity), they can be organized more effciently through hierarchical governance.
The transaction costs for market exchanges are greater than those of long-term relational
exchanges, so increased transaction costs should prompt a shift from external to internal
governance. A vulnerable frm that lacks information its exchange partners already have
may beneft similarly from internalizing transactions or activities. However, if a transaction
involves mixed asset specifcity and recurs, an alliance, a form of hybrid governance, is likely
to be the appropriate governance mode. Such hybrid governance modes demand mutual
dependence, mutual commitments to resource contributions and accepted compensation
mechanisms. Although alliances thus offer advantages, including the avoidance of uncertainty caused by market failure, their uneasy control position implies an inherent instability.
Critics of TCE also refer to limitations of the TCE to explain governance mode decisions
(see e.g. David and Han 2004; de Wulf and Odekerken-Schroder 2001; Ghoshal and Moran
1996; Weitz and Jap 1995). First, studies that draw on different conceptualizations of asset
specifcity and uncertainty produce some mixed results. Masten et al. (1991) fnd that vertical
integration in the shipbuilding industry became more likely in the presence of relationshipspecifc human capital, but Joskow’s (1985) research suggests that physical and site specifcity
increase the length of contracts among coal suppliers. Moreover, TCE fails to recognize the
potential value of transaction-specifc investments (Madhok and Tallman 1998), even if the
value creation potential of an alliance outweighs the costs associated with coordination and
protection. In contrast with TCE-based predictions, Russo (1992) indicates that uncertainty
relates negatively to backward integration, even as Poppo and Zenger (2002) argue that when
uncertainty interacts with asset specifcity and relational norms, the likelihood of relational
exchanges increases. Clearly more empirical testing is called for. Second,TCE may place too
much emphasis on opportunistic behaviour (Ghoshal and Moran 1996), neglecting the role
of relational governance (Heide and John 1992) and emphasizing hierarchical control as a
protection against opportunism, even if trust reduces transaction costs and makes alliances
more suitable governance modes.Third, only limited evidence really shows that governance
modes aligned with exchange conditions outperform misaligned governance modes (David
18
Alliance strategy formulation
and Han 2004), such as when Sampson (2004a) reveals that governance modes designed to
match the predictions of TCE experience improved innovation performance compared with
misaligned governance modes.

Resource-based view (RBV)
A frm can maximize its value by pooling and exploiting its valuable resources. According
to the RBV, frms attempt to fnd an optimal resource boundary that ensures the value of
their resources is realized best, compared with other resource combinations (Barney 1991).
A competitive advantage results when the frm can implement a value-creating strategy (Hitt
et al. 2000) that is not being implemented simultaneously by its (potential) competitors. Specifcally, a competitive advantage requires the frm to possess valuable, scarce, not imitable and
non-substitutable resources. Such characteristics also imply that the resources are diffcult to
move across frm boundaries, such that they constitute barriers to external procurement.Thus
market exchanges are not pivotal in the RBV; resources subject to such transactions tend
instead to be available, mobile and imitable, and their acquisition does not increase the frm’s
competitive advantage. If all desirable resources were available for acquisition through market
exchange at fair prices, it would be unwise for frms to get involved in alliances, which usually entail high governance costs and some sacrifce of organizational control.Therefore, the
RBV seems particularly appropriate for examining alliances or mergers and acquisitions; frms
engage in boundary-spanning activities to access and obtain resources that they do not own
but need in order to strengthen their competitive position.
In turn the RBV defnes both merger and acquisitions and alliances as strategies for gaining access to other frms’ resources, for the purpose of bringing them together and attaining
otherwise unavailable value (Das and Teng 2000b).When a frm does not possess the entire
bundle of resources and capabilities it needs, markets cannot bundle the required resources or
alternatives to attaining those resources are too costly, then it engages in mergers and acquisitions, or alliances. Mergers and acquisitions and alliances work towards the same overall objective, namely, obtaining resources, but the RBV suggests that two conditions particularly favour
alliances. First, an alliance constitutes a more viable alternative when not all the resources
owned by the target are valuable to the frm. Second, disposing of redundant or less valuable
resources induces a cost because such resources may be tied to the desired resources.Alliances
enable the focal frm to obtain only its desired resources, while bypassing undesired ones.
Furthermore, unlike mergers and acquisitions, alliances enable frms to protect their own
valuable resources. For example, if a frm wants to exploit certain resources but lacks the
competences to do so, alliances help them retain those resources and capitalize on their value,
only temporarily giving up control.The frm retains its access to its valuable resources and can
exploit them for future internal development.Alliances thus form when the realized value of
resources contributed to the alliance is greater than their value when realized through internal
uses or relinquishment.This scenario is especially likely for resources characterized by imperfect mobility—resources which are inimitable and non-substitutable.
Of course, with respect to governance mode decisions, there are also criticisms of the RBV.
First, even though prior RBV research offers a plethora of resources (e.g. reputation, culture,
brands, organizational routines) that might contribute to a frm’s competitive advantage, systematic empirical testing of their impact on governance decisions is relatively scarce (see for
exceptions Gu and Lu 2014; Villalonga and McGahan 2005). Second, the RBV primarily
Alliance strategy formulation
19
focuses on the possession of resources, not the costs of resource deployment, even though
using resources, whether autonomously or collaboratively, imposes coordination and value
appropriation costs.Although a complete RBV theory related to governance decisions is thus
lacking (Das and Teng 2000b), we note that it contributes valuable insights to value creation
within alliances. For a coherent RBV, further substantial conceptual and empirical research
is required.

Resource dependence perspective (RDP)
The RDP is rooted in an open system framework: frms are embedded sets of relationships,
which render them dependent on their external environment (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978).
According to Aldrich and Pfeffer (1976), frms cannot generate all the resources or functions
they need to maintain themselves, so they must enter into transactions and relations with
external actors that can supply those required resources. A frm’s ability to control external
resources determines its survival and provides power over external parties. Power originates
through resource scarcity, which refects three sources. First, the importance of an external
resource—or the extent to which the frm needs the resource to survive—reduces a frm’s
relative power. In particular, intangible resources such as patents, trademarks, market or technological know-how and human competences tend to be pivotal, whereas tangible resources,
such as commodities, can be effectively obtained through market exchanges. Second, a frm’s
discretion over the resource allocation and use (e.g. ownership rights, access) increases its
relative power.Third, the extent to which desired resources can be substituted by alternative
resources increases the frm’s relative power. With this focus on desired resources, the RDP
contributes insights into why frms engage in mergers and acquisitions and alliances.
At the heart of the RDP rests the notion that two frms prefer to avoid becoming dependent on each other’s resources (Blankenburg Holm et al. 1999). To reduce uncertainty and
increase its relative power, a frm may seek to become autonomous by managing its external
relationships with a two-fold strategy to acquire control over (1) critical resources to decrease
dependence on other frms and (2) resources that increase the dependence of other frms on
it. Mergers and acquisitions and alliances can help execute this dual strategy.When frms ally
to obtain access to critical resources, their long-term relationship probably enables them to
exercise some degree of external control, though mergers and acquisitions should be preferable when the frm needs more control over its partner (Finkelstein 1997).Alliances provide a
frm with more fexibility and options to scale investments up or down; mergers and acquisitions offer more control over joint resources (Yin and Shanley 2008).With fexible arrangements, frms can take advantage of changed circumstances, but they lose the capability to
exploit opportunities. Commitment and control over resources offer other benefts, but again
at a cost: the potential loss of investment and foregone opportunities.Thus, though resource
scarcity may encourage competition between frms, it also may stimulate cooperation, producing mergers and acquisitions that aim to increase command over external resources or
alliances based on mutual support rather than domination.
We also note two main limitations of the RDP. First, despite the intuitive understanding
it offers of rationales for distinct governance modes, strong empirical evidence about the distinct conditions that favour specifc governance modes remains lacking (Fink et al. 2006). For
example, internalizing resources through mergers and acquisitions could increase independence, but it may also impose high costs because acquiring capabilities tends to be expensive,
20
Alliance strategy formulation
and integrating capabilities takes time and effort. Similarly, obtaining resources through
market exchange increases a frm’s dependence on its external environment, yet the costs
are relatively low. Second, the RDP tends to neglect the importance of prior relationships,
even though social connectedness may affect alliance formation decisions (Gulati 1995b).An
account that focuses only on interdependence cannot explain how frms learn about new alliances and overcome the threats of partnerships.The RDP implicitly assumes that all information is freely available and equally accessible and thus that frms have equal opportunities to
ally. Despite these critiques, the RDP provides a clear indication that a frm’s survival depends
on its ability to command external resources.A frm is effective when it resolves the trade-off
between fexibility (i.e. market exchange and alliance) and commitment (i.e. internalization),
while also satisfying the demands of partners in its environment on which it relies most, and
which contribute most to its existence.

Strategic management theory (SMT)
To maximize their competitive strength, frms may adopt distinct governance modes, though
their underlying motives tend to converge. Therefore, the SMT imagines the governance
mode decision as a trade-off among distinct strategic motives, even if the strategic motives
identifed by SMT literature tend to be similar across modes. For example,Walter and Barney
(1990) provide a list of strategic drivers for mergers and acquisitions, and Glaister and Buckley
(1996) issue a similar list of strategic (and learning) motives that drive alliance formation. For
parsimony, we focus on key strategic motives for alliances.
In this setting, the SMT cites the need for prospective partners to achieve synergies across
their business strategies, such that an alliance can contribute to the realization of their strategic
objectives. Reasons to establish partnerships are vast: short-term effciency, resource access,
market position, geographical expansion, risk reduction, competitive blockades, economies of
scale, speed to market, minimized transaction costs, shared investments and so on.To organize
these reasons, Barringer and Harrison (2000) divide the strategic motives to form alliances
into four internally focused categories:
1
2
3
4
Increase market power. By erecting entry barriers or forming clusters with other frms,
alliances enable frms to adopt monopoly-like behaviour and increase their market power.
Increase political power. Individual frms team up to infuence governing bodies more
effectively, whether nationally or internationally.
Increase effciency. Being able to tap into others’ resources and share the load can result
in signifcant reductions of costs and economies of scale. Such partnerships often focus on
production, though they also might include marketing or even pre-competitive research.
Differentiation. Partnerships within and across sectors in pursuit of new customers and
innovation enable frms to differentiate offers from those of competitors.

Faulkner (1995) also recognizes external strategic motives. For example, globalization and
regionalization increase international turbulence and uncertainty, such that frms confront
the need for vast (fnancial) resources to deal with technological changes and shorter product
life cycles.
Burgeoning literature on strategic management thus offers many relevant insights, including analyses of the reasons for establishing alliances, alliance objectives and areas of potential
Alliance strategy formulation
21
confict. Despite this focus on strategic motives, few studies provide clear-cut insights into
governance mode decisions. Whereas the breadth of SMT constitutes one of its greatest
strengths, it also represents its greatest weakness: motivations arising from nearly all other
perspectives can be incorporated into the SMT, and its underlying logic could be applied to
any governance mode. For example, realizing economics of scale implies forward/backward
integration through mergers and acquisitions and alliances, as also explained by TCE. Increasing political power refects an institutional stream of thought, and obtaining and accessing
resources relates to the RBV. Thus though the SMT provides theoretical and managerial
insights in the strategic rationales that underlie alliance formation, its primary contribution
is its pragmatism.

Social network theory (SNT)
The social context that surrounds prior alliances infuences alliance formation decisions
(Gulati 1995b).Thus SNT views frms not as stand-alone entities but rather according to their
location within the network of inter-organizational relationships that determine their success and survival. Although SNT has not developed suffciently to inform governance mode
decisions, it asserts that a frm’s social network facilitates new alliances by providing valuable
information about the location of critical resources and the partner’s reliability. Repeated collaborations might provide information that helps frms learn about new opportunities and
enhance their trust in current and potential partners, though indirect relationships through
common partners also function as important referral mechanisms. Recognizing the ambiguities and uncertainty associated with alliances, access to valuable information thus might lower
search costs and alleviate risks of opportunism, which can make frms more likely to enter
alliances.
In the social network, potential partners become aware of one another’s existence, as well
as their needs, capabilities and alliance requirements. Social networks also provide information about partners’ reliability. For example, a partner that behaves opportunistically imposes
greater risk on any frm that enters into an alliance with it, but a rich social network contains
clues about past behaviours, so the frm can incorporate the partner’s network reputation into
its alliance formation decision.Although SNT thus offers a novel view on alliance formation,
we fnd again that the empirical evidence is virtually absent, in this case with regard to how
distinct social network resources prompt distinct governance mode decisions. For example,
are frms with central positions in an inter-frm network, which gives them access to highquality information (i.e. superior network resources), more inclined to establish hierarchical
governance modes, compared with frms with more peripheral network positions? Yet SNT
offers a relevant explanation for the emergence of alliances: social networks (of prior alliances)
function as conduits for valuable information and thus play an important role in shaping
future alliance formation.

Organizational learning perspective (OLP)
Firms might enter into partnerships primarily to learn new skills or acquire tacit knowledge
(Hamel 1991). According to the OLP, frms form alliances because the superior knowledge
they can gain will enhance their competitive position. Firms that place a high priority on
the acquisition of intangible knowledge (e.g. technological know-how) are likely to consider
22
Alliance strategy formulation
alliances important instruments because in alliances, learning occurs on both macro and micro
levels (Knight 2002). At the macro level, alliances provide a means for frms to share and
acquire knowledge, which may improve their competitiveness and proftability. At the micro
level of analysis, interpersonal links offer members of the frms an opportunity to share and
learn skills from one another. That is, alliances might add value to frms by providing
(1) the possibility for frm innovation and enhancement and (2) employees with the chance to
exchange professional practices that can show them how to perform their tasks better.
In terms of governance mode preferences though, OLP insights are less conclusive. In
general, hierarchical governance modes appear more appropriate for learning rather than
market exchanges because learning requires long-term and frequent interactions. However,
alliances constitute a particularly effective means for knowledge exchange, particularly if
that knowledge cannot be obtained easily in the market (Mowery et al. 1996) or internally
developed. An alliance is preferable if the desired knowledge is tacit and diffcult to evaluate; internal learning may prevent novel insights.Thus a frm that wants to learn a particular
skill stands a better chance of doing so if it forms an alliance with an expert frm and can
absorb external knowledge (Deeds and Hill 1996).Yet OLP neglects the costs and risks of
learning through alliances. In particular, knowledge transfers demand substantial investments
in training, education, relationship building and organizational adaptations (Lane and Lubatkin 1998). The risks pertain primarily to the unwanted transfer of proprietary knowledge
because frms in a learning alliance may compete for valuable knowledge (Hamel 1991).
Thus, the gains from learning alliances must be balanced against the pains of the dilution of
frm-specifc resources, the deterioration of integrative capabilities and the high demands on
management attention.

Institutional theory (IT)
With an open system perspective, IT states that frms are strongly infuenced by their external environments (Scott 2003). Infuenced by economic factors, such as industry regulations,
rival behaviour and socially constructed norms and beliefs, frms organize their boundaryspanning activities to mimic other frms. That is, frms pursue activities that increase their
legitimacy and cause them to appear in agreement with the prevailing rules, requirements
and norms in their business environments (Dimaggio and Powell 1983), as these rules
establish bases for production, exchange and distribution. With this logic, IT can answer
how and why frms adopt distinct governance modes, such as alliances, for example. In
particular, this school of thought states that alliances aim for legitimacy and social approval
rather than effectiveness or effciency. Legitimacy in the alliance process helps ensure that
the initiative receives a certain level of acceptance; without it, the initiative is unlikely to
persist. Such legitimacy can be enhanced by governance mode decisions because partnering with well-known, reputed partners improves the focal frm’s reputation or congruence
with prevailing norms. Common alliance practices thus emerge as collaborating becomes a
more widely accepted and desirable phenomenon, and frms copy rivals in their use of this
strategy (Teng 2005).
When social behaviour becomes accepted, it turns into an institution, and institutions give
industry members a clearly laid route to success and lead to a bandwagon effect (Venkatraman
et al. 1994). Pangarkar and Klein (1998) suggest that bandwagon pressures, which they capture
as the proportion of frms in a peer group that undertake alliances and their average number
Alliance strategy formulation
23
of alliances, infuence both the probability and number of alliances a frm undertakes. Such
bandwagon pressures also imply a lack of clarity in the frm’s cost–beneft calculations. Confronted with bandwagon pressure, frms are likely to adopt the alliance behaviours modelled
by their peers indiscriminately to ensure legitimacy, without considering the actual outcomes
of their alliance partnerships. Alternatively, this pressure might induce frms to hire managers
with similar industry backgrounds and experiences, who are familiar with industry practices.
Beyond bandwagon pressures, frms may engage in status-driven imitations of their peers,
especially the alliance behaviour performed by large and prestigious frms. Partnering with
an organization that promotes socially desirable objectives may enhance a frm’s reputation
more widely; high-profle charitable organizations thus can beneft from such a legitimacy
strategy.This view of strategic alliances implies a process of mimetic isomorphism: frms follow established rules and norms and copy, consciously or not, the strategies of their successful
peers.The resulting legitimacy and reputation can open doors to other relationships that help
the frm gain access to additional critical resources.
The IT thus offers a narrow, behaviourally oriented explanation of alliance formation
(Barringer and Harrison 2000). It cannot determine why particular governance modes exist or
why frms engage in boundary-spanning activities that deviate from the status quo. Furthermore, if every frm adopts similar governance modes, there is little opportunity for sustainable
competitive advantage. In the biotechnology feld for example, alliance-based competition
has become prevalent, such that frms may experience diffculty in differentiating themselves
through alliances. However, IT advances literature with its assertion that frms form alliances
to respond to bandwagon pressure and obtain social approval and legitimacy, rather than to
realize economic outcomes.

Overview
This concise overview of theoretical perspectives on governance mode decisions reveals the
varied and numerous insights that have been produced, ranging from economic to behavioural motives (see Table 2.2).Among the economic explanations,TCE focuses on cost minimization, whereas the RBV emphasizes value creation. At the other end of the spectrum, IT
offers a behavioural explanation: frms’ behaviour is guided by their legitimacy motives.The
OLP also adopts a behavioural explanation but also suggests economic undertones with its
proposal that inter-frm learning enables frms to reduce costs and improve proftability.The
RDP, SMT and SNT fall in the middle of this spectrum. The RDP originates in organizational theory but adopts economic explanations to explain why frms engage in alliances,
namely, to gain control over scarce resources. In contrast, the SMT is primarily economically
based, but recent studies have incorporated behavioural motives, such as inter-frm learning.
Finally, the SNT emphasizes behavioural explanations but also incorporates economic arguments to explain the infuence of network resources on alliance formation.
Academics and managers can certainly beneft from considering each theoretical perspective, but by blending them, they also might obtain a more useful understanding of governance
mode decisions. For example, if we combine TCE with OLP explanations, we might predict
that inter-frm learning will reduce transaction costs (Nooteboom 2004). A blend of OLP
with SNT, as exemplifed by Powell et al. (1996), indicates that industries with widely dispersed
sources of expertise require learning in networks rather than in individual frms.Augmenting
TCE with the RBV suggests that cost minimization and value maximization together drive
24
Transaction cost
economics
Resource-based
view
Resource dependence
perspective
Strategic
management theory
Social network
theory
Organizational
learning perspective
Institutional
theory
Description
Firms organize
their boundaryspanning
activities to
minimize
transaction costs.

Firms organize
their boundaryspanning
activities to
maximize value
creation.

Firms engage
in resource
exchanges
with external
parties to reduce
uncertainty and
obtain control.

Firms forge
alliances to
achieve synergies
between business
strategies.

Inter-frm
networks
constitute conduits
of information,
shaping alliance
decisions.

Firms engage in
inter-frm learning
to improve
their (core)
competences.

Firms organize
their boundaryspanning activities
to conform with
prevailing norms
imposed by their
environment.

Alliance
formation
logic
Alliances reduce
uncertainty
caused by
market failure
and reduce costs
associated with
hierarchy.

Alliances create
value when
procurement
of resources
is diffcult
through market
or internal
development.

Alliances enable
frms to minimize
dependence on
external parties or
maximize control
over scarce
resources.

Alliances enable
frms to build
and sustain a
competitive
advantage.

Firms use network
resources, such
as reputation and
referral, to inform
alliance formation.

Alliances function
as learning
vehicles to access,
obtain and exploit
(intangible)
knowledge.

Firms form
alliances to obtain
legitimization
by mimicking
competitors’
alliance behaviour.

Limitations
Neglects social
context and
value creation
motives.

Neglects costs
and investments
of resource
deployment.

Neglects social
context in which
exchanges are
embedded.

Encompasses
a variety of
strategic motives
tied to other
perspectives.

Neglects other
prototypical types
of governance
modes.

Neglects costs
and investments
required to
enable inter-frm
learning.

Neglects
alternative
motives, including
economic and
strategic.

Alliance strategy formulation
TABLE 2.2 Theoretical perspectives: alliance formation
Alliance strategy formulation
25
governance mode decisions (Zajac and Olsen 1993). The SNT may be especially open to
combinations with other perspectives, such as TCE and RDP, because then it can illustrate
how frms create and manage alliances as strategic responses to competitive uncertainties.The
IT school of thought also accords with Gulati’s (1995b) fndings that alliances form within
partner frms’ social networks; for example, the strength of a frm’s reputation and closeness in
the network of past alliances are strong predictors of alliance formation, and the likelihood of
alliance formation also relates positively to the complementarity of the partners’ capabilities,
status similarity and social capital arising from direct and indirect collaborative experiences.
Finally, SMT provides a more holistic perspective and potentially could incorporate elements
from the other perspectives. Building on this observation, we outline some managerial implications in the next section.

Alliance strategy formulation: decision-making steps
During alliance strategy formulation, frms must decide which governance mode fts their
objectives and situation. However, governance mode decisions are complex because frms
confront a plethora of reasons, occasionally opposing, that provide support for a specifc
governance mode. To organize decision making, we suggest that alliance strategy formulation overall comprises fve sequential decision-making steps (see Figure 2.1). If, after careful
analysis, a frm prefers an ‘ally’ governance mode, it must then explicate its alliance strategy
and prepare for partner selection.

1
Formulate
business strategy
Formulate corporate/business strategy and make an overview
of (new) activities and required resources.
Assess extent to which an activity is (or can be) executed
satisfactorily or needs to be organized in a different way.

2
Develop selection
framework
Select and attribute weight to governance mode decision
criteria, which include transaction costs, resource
requirements and dependence, strategic and learning motives,
network information and institutional pressures .

3
Retrieve internal and
external information
4
Assess alternative
governance modes
5a
Formulate
make or buy strategy
FIGURE 2.1
Gather information to conduct internal assessment; information
may for example pertain to interfirm activity linkages and
resource (in)divisibility.
Gather information to conduct external assessment; information
may for example pertain to industry developments and
government regulations.
Assess each alternative governance mode by applying the
governance mode decision criteria and information.
Market exchange is preferred when resources are widely
available; internalization is preferred when complete control is
required; merger and acquisition are preferred when control is
required, but resources cannot be developed internally; alliance
is preferred when strategic flexibility is deemed critical.

5b
Formulate
alliance strategy
If an alliance is the preferred governance
mode, develop a business case, including
alliance scope, objective, contributions, payoff, risks and cost–benefit analysis .

Decision-making steps: alliance strategy formulation
26
Alliance strategy formulation
Step 1: formulate business strategy
A frm frst must decide on its strategy, derived from its mission and its vision. The strategy
describes how the frm aims to achieve its long-term objectives. To realize those objectives,
the frm chooses some primary activities, new and/or existing ones, and identifes resources
needed to execute these activities. In turn, a frm must determine the extent to which it is
able to execute these activities satisfactorily. Such an overview should grant insights into the
objective(s), required tasks and feasibility to perform the activity. Once a frm has a complete
overview, it may enter the next step.

Step 2: develop a governance mode selection framework
To evaluate and decide on an appropriate governance mode for a specifc activity, selected
from the overview, it should be clear which decision criteria apply and how they affect the
governance mode decision. In particular, decision criteria might be organized according to
the theoretical perspectives presented in this chapter. Thus the analysis might include the
following:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Transaction-based motives, such as the frequency of the activity, uncertainty surrounding the activity and degree of asset specifcity; an alliance is preferred when a transaction
is recurring, surrounded by moderate uncertainty and requires mixed alliance-specifc
investments.
Resource-based motives, including the nature of existing and desired resources, divisibility of resources and their availability; an alliance is preferred when an external
party possesses valuable and scarce resources (i.e. blocking market exchange), but the
desired resources are part of a larger and indivisible resource endowment (i.e. blocking
a merger).
Dependence-based motives, such as the degree to which existing and desired resources
are critical to the activity and freely available; an alliance is preferred when a frm seeks
fexible control over external resources.
Strategic motives, such as market power, market entry, blocking competitors and international expansion: an alliance is preferred when it enables a frm to realize strategic
objectives.
Network criteria or information about a potential partner’s credibility and reliability and
referrals; an alliance (partner) is preferred when a frm receives supportive information
via its alliance network.
Organizational learning criteria, including the extent to which fast access to knowledge
is required, the extent to which knowledge must be recombined and the extent of speed
required in generating new knowledge; an alliance is preferred when speed, fexibility
and knowledge recombination are imperative.
Institutional-based motives, incorporating criteria such as legitimacy, reputation and
status; an alliance is preferred when external pressure imposes partnering as common
practice.

To complement the selection framework, frms should assign each criterion a relative weight.
For example, a frm might decide that obtaining legitimacy outweighs economic benefts,
commanding external control over scarce resources outweighs prior established reputations
Alliance strategy formulation
27
or acquiring valuable market know-how outweighs improving market position. The choice
of governance mode should rely on a cost–beneft analysis of the trade-offs among distinct
decision criteria.

Step 3: retrieve internal and external information
To apply their selection framework, frms should conduct internal and external assessments
to obtain the necessary information.The internal analysis involves gathering detailed information within the frm about the nature of the activity, the required resources, inter-frm
activity linkages, organizational culture, and systems and procedures. An external analysis
should feature information about, for example, industry developments and regulations, competitor strategies and actions, and governmental policies. Building on such information, the
frm can evaluate and decide on the governance mode that is most appropriate for any
selected activity.

Step 4: assess alternative governance modes
Against the backdrop of the selection framework, supportive guidelines and gathered information about the internal and external contexts, frms must recognize that each governance
mode entails its own unique advantages and disadvantages (see Table 2.1) as they decide on
the most appropriate governance mode for any specifc activity. In short, a market exchange
is preferable when the required resources are relatively easily available but do not necessarily
enhance a frm’s competitive advantage. Internal procurement or mergers and acquisitions are
ideal if unifed ownership and control rights permit more thorough exploitation of combined
organizational resources, even if such exploitations demand higher investments (e.g. physical,
human, intangible resources) and increased governance costs.Alliances, which cannot exploit
joint assets as intensively as mergers and acquisitions but which offer more fexibility, are
preferable if continuing cooperation is benefcial and centralized control could harm value
creation.A frm might conclude this step with the following questions:
•
•
•
Does the chosen governance mode generate strategic value or competitive power?
Does it impose a risk of losing competitive strength to rivals?
Does the mode disrupt an activity’s interrelatedness with other frm’s activities?

If the answers to these critical questions are unsatisfactory, a frm may need to reconsider its decision and re-engage in Steps 2 and 3. However, if a frm, on the basis of extensive analysis, decides
that an ‘ally’ governance mode is its best option, the next step is to explicate its alliance strategy.

Step 5: formulate alliance strategy
The fnal step formalizes the alliance strategy. The frm should decide which external
source(s) of resources it wants to deploy in support of the selected activity to attain its
objectives. An alliance strategy summarizes these decisions, often formalized in the form
of a business case that describes the scope of activities taken into account, the objective of
the alliance, the nature of the partnership and a cost–beneft analysis.A clear business case is
critical to approach and select potential partners and serves as input for alliance negotiation
and design.

28
Alliance strategy formulation
Summary
In this chapter, we have provided overviews of the dominant theoretical perspectives that
attempt to explain governance mode decisions.Transaction costs, resource synergies, dependence, informational advantages, strategic motives, inter-frm learning and institutional pressures all impact the choice between ‘make’,‘buy’ and ‘ally’.We argue that in order to arrive at
a governance mode decision, executives should consider all motives.To this end, we suggest a
fve-step procedure for frms to help them to make governance mode decisions and achieve
a well-formulated alliance strategy. Much of the logic described herein, however, also applies
to alliance-oriented governance form decisions (e.g. alliance structure). That is, the governance mode decision of a frm, which itself might be infuenced by transaction costs, resource
alignment and institutional pressures, for example, infuences the frm’s structural preference
in terms of non-equity versus equity-based governance forms.We go into detail on structural
preferences in Chapter 5, but a combined analysis of governance mode (e.g. make, buy, ally)
and governance form (e.g. equity, non-equity) may be benefcial.

CASE: GOOGLE–HUBSPOT2
Larry Page and Sergey Brin were both students at Stanford University studying computer sciences. During their stay at Stanford, in 1996, they developed an algorithm able to search the
internet effectively. This algorithm was known as ‘BackRub’. On 4 September 1998, Google
was offcially founded as a company, and the search engine proved very successful. In 2000,
Google began selling advertisements which were based on search keywords. The company
eventually moved to Mountain View in 2003 and was taken public in 2004. The company
experienced a fast growth and soon became one of the largest media companies in the
world. The company launched a number of new features in a relatively short time span. In
2002, Google News was introduced; in 2004, Gmail; followed by Google Maps in 2005. In
2006, it bought YouTube, and Google Chrome was introduced in 2008.
With its growing success, its competition became more ferce also. Microsoft offered Bing
as a search engine and offered a competing webmail service under the name of Hotmail.
Also Microsoft offered Windows Live Local as an alternative for Google Maps. Google had
already introduced Chrome as a web browser, but it also began competing with Microsoft’s
operating system, Windows, by introducing the Linux-based operating system Chrome OS.
Google was hit hard by the fnancial crisis in 2007 and 2008. Revenues from selling advertisements declined sharply. To improve its effcacy in selling ads, Google agreed to buy
DoubleClick in 2007. This marked the start of cookie-based tracking. Google grew further,
and in 2014, the company had more than 70 offces in 41 countries.
In growing the company, utilizing the competencies of others has been crucial. Getting
access to competencies can be achieved either through acquisitions, such as YouTube, or
partnerships. Google had been very active in forging partnerships. For instance, Google
teamed up with NASA in 2005 to explore large-scale data management and distributed
computing. Part of this collaboration was the building of a Google Research and Development centre at the Ames Research Centre of NASA. Another partnership is the one with
GeoEye in which it launched a satellite which provided Google with high-resolution imagery
for Google Earth. Another way of getting access to resources is investing in startups and
Alliance strategy formulation
29
scale-ups. On 31 March 2009, Google established a $100 million fund. This commitment
was raised to $300 million annually. Since 2015, Google Ventures has been renamed GV.
One of the companies in which Google Ventures has invested is HubSpot.
HubSpot was established at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) by Brian
Halligan and Dharmesh Shah in 2006. It develops and markets software products for
inbound marketing, sales and customer services. In the years 2007 to 2010, it witnessed
step growth in revenues and raised a total of €33.5 million in three equity rounds. Then,
in March 2011, it raised another $32 million from, amongst others, Google Ventures. The
changing way people shop, learn and buy requires new way of marketing and sales. The
software of HubSpot helps business to transform accordingly. An important element in this
change is the move away from outbound marketing (cold calls, email blasts and direct mail)
to inbound marketing (Google, blogs, social media, mobile). Google shares the ‘belief that
search engines, social media and mobile devices have fundamentally changed how businesses should market themselves’. The investment allowed HubSpot to further penetrate
the market of small- and medium-sized enterprises. Since the investment, HubSpot integrated many Google features, such as Google Calendar, Gmail, AdWords, Docs and Drive. In
2018, HubSpot announced the expanding of the partnership between the two companies
through the adoption of Google Cloud to expand its international cloud infrastructure. This
allowed HubSpot to invest more in its current Google Cloud integrations. Next, customers
would beneft from increased data security. The combination of Google analytical capabilities with HubSpot of turning data into actions is the sweet spot of the collaboration. Given
this integration and close collaboration between the two, there has been some debate as to
Google buying HubSpot and further integrating the two platforms. Up till date, Google did
not buy the platform, and the two are thus still collaborating as strategic partners.

Questions
1
2
3
What are (strategic) motives for Google to prefer collaborative agreements over mergers and/or internal growth?
What problems may Google and HubSpot experience as the alliance progresses? How
can they overcome these problems?
To what extent is the alliance agreement between Google and HubSpot typical for the
ICT industry? Explain whether the alliance is likely to change industry structure and
competitors’ strategic behaviour.

Notes
1 Williamson (1985) calls the three governance modes hierarchy, market and hybrid.
2 Crunchbase (2022); Google (2022); Hubspot (2022a, 2022b).

3
ALLIANCE PARTNER SELECTION
The alliance partner selection stage involves the choice of a partner or group of partners
with which a frm seeks to realize its objectives. Questions that need to be addressed during
this stage include which potential partners exist, which partner is most suitable and what
are potential strengths and weaknesses of each potential partner? Answering these questions
requires an understanding of the notion of partner ft—that is, of the comparative inter-frm
differences related to certain attributes or dimensions that continually shape the pattern of
interaction between partners. If partners are highly compatible, such as in their culture or
networks, they may be more likely to realize their objectives. Partner misft instead tends to
jeopardize the relationship; therefore, pre-existing knowledge about the degree and content
of misft provides valuable information for improving the design and management of any
alliance.To inform their alliance partner selection, managers must understand the differences
among various types of ft and comprehend the rationales that underpin partner selection
(described in the frst section). The following two sections provide a systematic framework
containing a set of decision-making steps for alliance partner selection, along with a summary.
The fnal section concludes with a case illustration.

Types of partner ft
In alliance literature, partner ft relies on two related concepts, each with a specifc logic.
The frst type pertains to resource complementarity between partners as a means to enhance
the alliance’s collaborative effectiveness; Parkhe (1991) calls it Type I diversity. In contrast, a
second type of partner ft refers to the extent to which inter-frm characteristics, including
strategic, cultural, organizational and operational features, are compatible, which we refer to
as partner ft compatibility and which is akin to Type II diversity. Incompatibility negatively
affects alliance functioning and, without proper intervention, can result in the premature
dissolution of the relationship. Both types of partner ft can explain how (mis)ft affects
partners’ ability to work jointly and effectively, but their underlying logic varies: complementarity functions as a rationale for alliance formation; incompatibility impedes alliance
development.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-3
Alliance partner selection
31
Partner ft: resource complementarity
Resource complementarity refers to the extent to which the joint use of distinct sets of
resources yields a higher total return than the sum of returns earned if each set of resources
were used independently (Chi 1994; Dyer and Singh 1998). In this defnition, alliances give
an option to a frm that lacks the entire bundle of resources and capabilities it needs to sustain a competitive edge in a particular domain of activity or the capability to develop them
competitively (Mowery et al. 1998). Resource complementarity is thus an important partner selection criterion; a frm should prefer a potential partner that creates higher relative
ft between resource foundations and resource provisions. Lambe et al. (2002) indicate that
resource complementarity enables parties to develop an idiosyncratic resource foundation
which fosters joint value creation. According to Hitt et al. (2000), emerging market frms
concentrate more on fnancial assets, technical capabilities, intangible assets and willingness
to share expertise than do developed market frms. Developed market frms instead want to
leverage their resources, such as local market knowledge and access, through partner selection.
Thus, to increase an alliance’s value creation potential, frms seek the specifc partners with
which they can align their particular resources.
But resource complementarity as a guiding principle constitutes a mixed blessing because
not all contributed resources can be used effectively in an alliance (Das and Teng 2000b).
Consider four types of resource alignment confgurations; the frst pair centres on resource
synergies, but the second pair focuses on resource under-performance in alliances:
1
2
3
4
Complementary resource alignment occurs when frms contribute dissimilar resources
because their complementarity enables them to create synergy and capitalize on nonredundant distinctive competences.
Supplementary resource alignment occurs when frms supply similar resources to an
alliance, such as to obtain economies of scale, increase their market power, or supply
fnancial resources, essential to the formation of an alliance.
Surplus resource alignment suggests that frms contribute dissimilar resources that are not
utilized fully. For example, a frm could contribute more manufacturing capacity than
needed. Such slack resources may be redundant, though the surplus also might provide
protection against future contingencies.
Wasteful resource alignment occurs when similar resources under-perform. For example,
managerial know-how cannot be integrated in another frm, such that it simply becomes
an additional cost of the alliance.

In addition, though resource complementarity might reduce the risk of opportunistic behaviour and goal conficts, because the long-term value creation is likely to outweigh the shortterm rewards, it increases risks for misappropriation and unwanted knowledge spillovers.
Partnering frms that contribute complementary resources confront a tempting opportunity
to gather up the valuable new resources provided by their counterparts. As noted by Cohen
and Levinthal (1990), overlap in knowledge resources actually improves partners’ ability to
absorb knowledge, and their in-depth understanding of the potential value and deployment
of resources allows them to interact more and share knowledge more easily and effectively.
Resource complementarity thus may stimulate inter-frm learning—which increases the likelihood of involuntary transfers of critical resources. The initial resource-based motives for
value creation therefore could undermine a frm’s competitive position over time.Thus, frms
32
Alliance partner selection
must consider the extent to which a partner’s anticipated resource contributions will be suffcient motive to forge an alliance.

Partner ft: compatibility
Compatibility refers to the degree to which partner frms share similar characteristics (Douma
et al. 2000; Liu et al. 2015).This sort of partner ft reinforces collective strength and positively infuences alliance effectiveness because it facilitates alliance processes. For example, the propensity for
opportunistic behaviour declines when the parties in an alliance have well-matched frm characteristics because compatibility increases the quality of the relationship (Saxton 1997). Furthermore,
compatibility determines the extent to which organizations can get along and realize anticipated
synergies to achieve alliance success, such that alliances are more successful when partners have
similar management styles, cultures, asset sizes and venture experience levels (Harrigan 1988; Lavie
et al. 2012). However, misft jeopardizes alliance functioning by impeding inter-frm collaboration.
Emphasizing compatibility during partner selection enables frms to select appropriate partners
or develop and implement corrective measures if misft occurs.We consider fve types of ft: (1)
strategic, (2) organizational, (3) operational, (4) cultural and (5) human (see Table 3.1).
TABLE 3.1 Partner ft types
Description
Implications
Resource
complementarity
Resource alignment yields a
higher return than the sum of
returns if each set of resources
were used independently.

• Resource complementarity provides
a motive for alliance formation.
• Threat of resource leakage and cost of
non-performing resources.

Strategic ft
Compatibility in partners’
strategic view and
orientation.

• Good ft signals long-term commitment.
• Misft creates strategic conficts that
undermine joint business proposition.

Organizational ft
Compatibility in partners’
organizational structure and
routines.

• Good ft reduces uncertainty about
intentions, interests and competences.
• Misft undermines collective sense making
and increases risk of decision-making
conficts.

Operational ft
Compatibility in partners’
operational systems.

• Good ft enables partners to integrate
alliance activities.
• Misft impedes the execution of day-to-day
alliance operations.

Cultural ft
Compatibility in partners’
organizational culture.

• Good ft stimulates joint sense making.
• Misft undermines the quality of the working
relationship at different levels in the alliance.

Human ft
Compatibility in partners’
employee backgrounds and
experiences.

• Good ft stimulates trust building and
inter-partner learning.
• Misft fosters interpersonal conficts
and impedes communication and
information exchange.

Sources: Douma et al. (2000); Hennart and Zeng (2005); Sarkar et al. (2001).

Alliance partner selection
33
Strategic ft
Drawing on strategic management theory, alliance research has emphasized the concept of
strategic ft among partners (Douma et al. 2000). Highly compatible business and alliance
goals, appropriate competitive positions, compatible strategic missions and visions, mutual
dependence on one another’s resources, similar views about present and future developments
and a shared understanding of the business rationale constitute indicators of strategic ft.
Appreciation by the market (i.e. fnancial analysts) is an important driver of such strategic ft.
Thus good strategic ft is a prerequisite for any alliance because it implies that individual interests are carefully weighed against the potential benefts and hazards of the alliance. Partners
have perceived the added value for their individual businesses and recognize the important
role they play in terms of alliance success. Selecting a partner with good strategic ft increases
the long-term value creation potential of alliances by signalling that partners have converging
long-term interests and are not likely to engage in behaviour that poses a competitive threat.
A strategic misft is a threat, however. In the long term, partners with poor ft may be less
committed and allocate resources to alternative, more valuable arrangements. Signals for strategic misft include partners acting competitively in the areas on which the alliance focuses,
varying perceptions of the importance of the alliance, divergent industry visions, the pursuit
of potentially conficting alliance objectives and market rejection of the alliance. If limited
strategic ft is present, frms must carefully consider whether it can be strengthened; otherwise,
they should not collaborate. Corrective measures might attempt to encourage top management dialogue about the strategic vision, reduce or expand the alliance scope, realign alliance
strategies, emphasize added value and communicate carefully with stakeholders about the
importance of the alliance.That is, if frms pursue an alliance with poor strategic ft, they face
greater demands on their alliance design and management.

Organizational ft
The degree to which partners’ organizations are compatible refects their organizational characteristics, such as management styles, operating procedures, information systems, decisionmaking level (e.g. centralized versus decentralized), management style (participatory versus
authoritarian) and reliance on formal planning and control systems (Parkhe 1991). Thus
Douma et al. (2000) call organizational ft a critical factor for alliance success, one that reduces
uncertainty about the partner’s intentions, interests or competences. Partners with similar
organizational attributes, such as customers, manufacturing capabilities and other organizational processes, are more likely to enjoy synergies (Saxton 1997). However, alliance partners
almost always differ in some organization characteristics, so the goal is to arrive at a profound
understanding of these differences and initiate corrective measures.
Poor organizational ft jeopardizes alliance development and could limit partners’ ability to engage in collective sense making, joint decision making or inter-frm learning. If
a frm with a centralized, mechanistic structure collaborates with a frm with an organic,
decentralized structure, the resulting misft impedes their constructive collaboration (Parkhe
1991). Similarly, when established frms collaborate with entrepreneurial frms, their decisionmaking structures do not naturally align, which often leads to confict, misunderstanding
and frustration. If partners exhibit different management styles and institutionalized different
internal task routines, they are less likely to attain relational trust, which in turn impedes alliance performance (Lavie et al. 2012). To overcome these potential hazards, alliance partners
34
Alliance partner selection
should anticipate organizational misft during the alliance design and management stages
and emphasize the need for fexibility and adaptation. Manageability increases with relatively
simple alliance designs, characterized by limited alliance scope, few alliance partners, contracts
with contingency clauses and clear task divisions. In addition, proactive alliance management,
achieved by building relational capital and emphasizing constructive partner interactions, can
overcome the risks associated with organizational misft. If well managed then, organization
misft might even help partners align their organizational differences.

Operational ft
Operational ft, or frms’ procedural capabilities, can be captured by effective management,
operational aspects of the business model, operational standards, working procedures and operational systems (Sarkar et al. 2001). Good operational ft indicates that alliance partners can
collaborate effectively at the operational level, which gives alliances a better chance of success
because the links between the partners’ operations are transparent. For example, when two
manufacturers seek to collaborate, the extent to which they can jointly create value largely
depends on their ability to integrate operational facilities.With good operational ft, the partners can work together effciently, reduce the costs required for coordination, resolve emerging
operational issues quickly and discover potential areas for improvements.Thus, good strategic
and organizational ft is a prerequisite for long-term commitment; operational ft is critical for
determining the extent to which alliance partners can realize the potential benefts.
Poor operational ft creates the risk that processes will stall or produce inadequate output,
thus jeopardizing value creation. When the operational processes do not match, or assumptions about the capabilities and capacities of either partner go unchecked, the seeds are
planted for future operational problems. They can also lead to poor communication among
operational staff, which impedes quick confict resolution. Poor operational ft creates ambiguity about each partner’s roles and skills, which impedes decision-making. Furthermore, it
undermines alliance leadership and performance management, both of which are required to
monitor and manage the alliance’s progress. However, to overcome the risks resulting from
poor operational ft, potential alliance partners simply need to incorporate partner differences
in their alliance design and management. Joint training and education, personnel transfer
across partners and codevelopment of operational systems could prevent the emergence of
any of these concerns.

Cultural ft
Partners’ cultures, including their ideologies, values and practices, should not come into too
much confict (Park and Ungson 1997). Organization culture, interwoven into the very fabric
of the partners, is manifest in the distribution of power and control, commitment to the alliance, openness of the organization, innovation intentions and willingness to collaborate. Cultural ft suggests that partners have suffcient awareness and fexibility to work constructively
and learn from their cultural differences to achieve strength. Cultural ft acts as a lubricant in
the relationship.
A cultural misft instead gums up the works. It can cause conficts in corporate boardrooms, frictions at the operational level and mistrust between the partners. Social incompatibility may lead to partners’ inability to develop harmonious relationships (Sarkar et al.
2001). If alliance employees resist an understanding of their partner’s culture, the complete
Alliance partner selection
35
failure of the alliance is likely.To deal with their different cultures, partners can adopt several
approaches. In non-equity based alliances, for example, partners may decide to allow the
cultures to coexist, whereas for joint ventures, partners might engage in a process of cultural
assimilation, combining the positive elements of both cultures to develop a new culture. In
any case, the partners must initiate activities that stimulate cultural awareness, such as joint
sessions, cultural training or employee transfers. If well managed, a cultural misft may even
improve alliance performance and lead to spin-offs and positive cultural changes in the partnering organizations.

Human ft
Finally, human ft refers to the degree to which individuals or teams of individuals who will
work together in the alliance have converging backgrounds, experiences and personalities
(Douma et al. 2000). Because the behaviours of employees infuence proftability, customer
satisfaction and other important outcomes directly, managing human ft is utterly critical.Trust
building and learning between employees can ensure the development of strong relationships
and high-quality learning interfaces. Common backgrounds, experiences and personalities
support employees’ mutual understanding, ease interactions and streamline employee behaviour. In addition, human ft encourages collaboration in alliance teams, which often determines alliance success.
But poor human ft likely inhibits alliance progress; misunderstandings and conficts among
alliance employees undermine alliance progress. High-quality interpersonal interactions are
prerequisites for the transfer of tacit know-how about markets, management and technologies. To mitigate the impact of poor human ft, alliance partners should undertake human
resource management activities, including formal policies and everyday practices focused on
training and monitoring. Partners might reward employees by offering alliance team-based
incentives tied to overall performance. In addition, motivating and retaining key employees is
an important task for alliance management to help employees adjust to new alliance environments and then interact and work effectively with employees from their new alliance partner.
Overall partner ft thus drives the partner selection stage. Complementary resources stimulate joint coordination, which increases proftability and competitive advantages. Parties
should participate in learning processes to exploit these synergies, explore complementary
resource strengths, and thus achieve greater alliance performance. Compatibility enables parties to cooperate effciently and effectively; resource complementarity gives parties incentives
to sacrifce their short-term individual goals to achieve long-term value creation. Partner ft
in terms of compatibility also facilitates learning by creating the perception that benefts for
the partner are in the best interests of the focal frm. Finally, it reduces misappropriation concerns, mitigates the risk of conficts, contributes to the development of trust and commitment
and enables inter-partner learning. However, when confronted with an undesired misft, frms
must decide whether to continue collaborating or take appropriate measures in the design and
management phase to deal with the potential hazards.

Alliance partner selection: decision-making steps
During the alliance partner selection stage, frms identify the partner that fts best with their
organization and objectives.The focus is on achieving collective alignment across the partners’
resources, strategies, organizations, operations, cultures and people.To evaluate the degree of
36
Alliance partner selection
1
Develop partner profile
Develop a preferred partner profile based on the alliance
business case, as built during strategy formulation stage.
Explicate partner requirements in terms of desired resources,
markets, technologies and so forth.

2
Long and short lists of
potential partners
Construct long and short lists of potential partners.
Long list provides overview of and insight into the number of
alternative partners; short list contains detailed information
about potential partners.

3
Develop partner fit
framework
Select partner selection criteria: account for distinct types of
partner fit and attribute relative weight to each set of criteria.
Extend partner fit analysis with additional partner selection
criteria if desired.

4
Conduct partner fit
analysis
Gather internal and external information on possible partners; if
necessary, engage in pre-negotiations to exchange information.
Apply partner fit framework to assess potential partners on the
short list and reduce number of partner(s) to be considered.

5
Risk assessment
Conduct risk assessment of potential non-performing resources,
misfits and threats to competitive position.
Consider feasibility of corrective measures to deal with risks
and threats with regard to the selected partner.

FIGURE 3.1
Decision-making steps: alliance partner selection
ft, and thus the feasibility of the alliance, two questions are key: how can ft be measured,
and what degree of ft is required for a successful alliance? A systematic analysis of partner ft
provides clear insights into the chances for success, along with a better understanding of the
nature and magnitude of corrective measures needed to mitigate negative effects. Firms must
recognize though that managing partner ft effectively may require considerable investments,
which implies the greater importance of careful partner selection.To this end, we suggest that
alliance partner selection should involve a (repetitive) sequence of fve decision-making steps
(see Figure 3.1).

Step 1: develop partner profle
A partner profle describes the ideal alliance partner, according to the frm’s own requirements and intentions. It thus constitutes an important preparatory activity.The frm’s intentions might be explicated partially in its business case, which is the end product of the alliance
strategy formulation stage.To this end product, the frm should add generic partner ft criteria. Firms can map the important resources and competences of potential partners and how
they would contribute to the alliance. Furthermore, they should explicate requirements, in
terms of desired markets, products, services and technologies.They can also explicate details
such as the ideal size, organization structure, reputation and image of a preferred partner. In
terms of operational ft, frms should note required technologies and operational systems;
cultural and human ft criteria should include optimal organizational culture and desired
Alliance partner selection
37
competences and skills. In addition, they might incorporate fnancial and legal criteria into
partner profles or mention a potential partner’s preferred reputation in managing alliances.
Developing a complete partner profle enables frms to recognize good potential partners
when they appear.

Step 2: create long and short lists of potential partners
A long list of potential partners summarizes all possible partners, which is important for
two reasons. First, the long list enables the frm to make informed decisions about which
potential partners are appropriate. Second, it reveals the multiple alternatives available, which
signals a strong bargaining position. Potential partners can be identifed through different
sources—intermediaries, the internet, trade associations, business networks, conferences, line
of industries or (patent) databases, to name just a few. Information about foreign alliances is
available from foreign investment agencies, government embassies and consulates.And a frm
can seek referrals through its existing alliance partners. Even more detailed company information might be found in websites, print articles, work documents, blogs and annual reports or
gathered from the insights of people in personal networks.Whereas the long list provides an
overview, a short list enables frms to conduct in-depth analyses of potential partners. Scrutinizing all potential partners demands substantial resources and time. Against the backdrop
of the partner selection criteria in Step 1, the frms can compare information about these
potential partners to reduce their long list to the short list.This transfer demands that frms
do the following:
•
•
•
Collect as much pertinent, publicly available information on potential partners as possible.
Assess the degree to which potential partners meet the partner profle.
Decide which potential partners are most suitable for the short list because they can supply the desired resources and exhibit good compatibility with the frm.

Step 3: build partner ft framework
With this step, a frm develops a detailed partner ft framework to prepare for assessments of
potential partners on the short list. To this end, it frst explicates indicators for each type of
partner ft and then prioritizes those types by indicating their relative importance.The partner
ft framework thus comprises partner dimensions, indicators and the relative weight of each
dimension:
•
•
•
•
Resource complementarity indicators include the extent to which resources are complementary, and anticipated resource contributions will enhance the performance of the
alliance.
Strategic ft indicators include alignment between partners’ mission and vision, business
strategy, industry threats and opportunities, technological developments, mutual dependence, strategic importance, balanced power and a win–win situation.
Organizational ft entails compatibility in frm size, authority structure, decision-making
approaches, planning and control systems, accounting systems, information systems, management style and incentive systems.
Operational ft includes operational standards and procedures, systems, allocation of tasks,
coordination and performance measurement.

38
Alliance partner selection
•
Cultural ft indicators include alignment in ideologies, values, beliefs and attitudes, as
well as ethical matters and management styles. Other potential indicators might involve
experience with the partner, respect and balance, ease of doing business, communication
style and commitment. When considering allying abroad, issues such as the political or
economic climate and national culture also should be taken into consideration.
Human ft entails the ‘click’ in personal styles and attitudes, openness, fexibility, employment policies, reward systems, training and education.

•
Step 4: execute partner ft analysis
Now that the partner selection criteria and the relative weight of each has been determined,
the frm must reanalyze existing information and collect any additional information that
might be needed. To identify the ft between the frm and its presumed partner(s), relevant,
often detailed, information must be acquired about each aspect in the ft analysis framework.
This information pertains not only to a potential partner but also to the focal frm. For each
potential partner on the short list, relevant information can be acquired through internet
searches, annual reports and third parties.Alliance databases are also useful tools for gathering
information. But the frm still needs to consider the information about itself that indicates
which individuals, teams, departments or business units will be most involved to ensure that
they are ready to enter an alliance. The systematic reporting of the partner ft analysis thus
provides a foundation for decision making. Such reports can include a textual partner ft
report, accompanied by fgures and tables.
Collecting some types of information (e.g. human, operational ft) can be cumbersome.
Thus frms might agree to organize a preliminary meeting with a potential partner in order to
involve it in the partner analysis.The meeting should be clearly exploratory, but the frm also
might ask the partner frm to sign a non-disclosure agreement. Such a meeting enables the
frm and the potential partner to get to know each other and retrieve pertinent information.
For example, they might obtain insights about both partners’ strengths, personal chemistry,
need to protect intellectual property and potential hazards.With the information from the ft
analyses and the evaluation meetings, the frm can begin to consider seriously alliances with
one or more partners.

Step 5: conduct risk assessment
The last step in the partner selection analysis requires the frm to conduct a risk assessment
of the selected (potential) partner(s). It is unlikely that a frm possesses great ft with the preferred partner on every indicator. Rather, the evaluation helps the frm identify and discuss
potential risks and hazards. Risks associated with resource complementarity primarily pertain
to idle resources and the threat of resource leakage. Non- or under-performing resources
hamper joint value creation, but the unwanted transfer of resources can undermine the frm’s
own competitive advantage. Organizational alignment risks involve incompatible organization designs (e.g. structure, decision making, management style), which may require a frm
to reorganize. The operational risks refer to the costs associated with securing alignment,
such as setting up new departments or units to support the alliance. Integrating control and
operating systems demand additional coordination efforts. Cultural and human risks derive
from incompatibilities in partners’ day-to-day functioning.To develop a steady, collaborative
Alliance partner selection
39
culture, with trusting teams and committed individuals, frms should offer training and education, as well as recognize the importance of incentives. The results of this analysis can be
presented in a risk-and-yield analysis, featuring an overview of partner ft criteria, the degree
of ft, the associated risk and corrective measures.
Following these fve steps for partner selection does not mean a clear-cut recipe for instant
alliance success. Rather, by using the partner selection framework, alliance managers can better design and manage their alliances and explicate and focus their conversations with potential partners. A partner selection analysis means doing the necessary homework; occasionally,
frms will need to retrace their steps. If the results of the risk assessment stage are unsatisfying
and a potential partner emerges as inappropriate, the frm should reconsider Steps 2–4. At
the end of the day though, the key to any alliance remains in the hand of the managers who
are responsible for the next alliance development stage, for which this analysis should set the
agenda: the alliance negotiation.

Summary
We have provided an overview of the drivers of alliance partner selection. Whereas partner
ft in terms of resource complementarity emphasizes a value creation logic, partner ft related
to compatibility functions as a lubricant for inter-frm collaboration.When confronted with
an undesired misft, frms must decide whether to continue collaborating or take appropriate
measures in the design and management phase to deal with the potential hazards. We have
also presented a fve-step procedure for frms to use in their partner selection decisions. Its
application results in the selection of a partner with which to enter into alliance negotiations.
Moreover, a frm may have achieved partner ft, but as the alliance is executed, unseen contingencies, both internal and external, continuously issue challenges to the maintenance of
partner ft.Without deliberate managerial action, even an alliance with an ideal partner ft can
in the end produce disappointing results.To guide managerial action, frms might reapply the
partner analysis framework as the alliance progresses.

CASE: SOLARDUCK1
Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have been rising increasingly over the past
decades and have reached levels which have not been seen for the past 800,000 years.
Although sometimes heavily debated in society, a general consensus exists about the connection between greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere and global average
temperatures. Based on the studies of Dr Charles Keeling, in the late ffties and sixties
of the last century, the frst indication were given for ‘anthropogenic’ (human caused)
contributions to global warming. In 1972, the Club of Rome published a ground-breaking
report titled ‘The Limits to Growth’. In this report, the exhaustion of natural resources
was highlighted as a factor which would ultimately lead to a decline in economic growth,
availability of food and could even result in societal collapse. However, the report contained a message of hope. Human kind is able to live on the earth indefnitely if limits are imposed allowing for a restoration of the equilibrium between economic activity
and earth’s ability to sustain those. Even though the publication of this report increased
environmental awareness, carbon emissions have increased further. In 2015, a turning
40
Alliance partner selection
point was reached. The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on climate
change which was adopted by 196 countries. Its objective is to limit global warming to
well below 2 degrees Celsius, compared to the pre-industrial age. At its core, the Paris
Agreement provides a framework for fnancial, technical and capacity building; stimulating international collaboration; accelerating technology development; and increasing
international solidarity. The agreement also changed the way in which human kind generates the energy it demands.
An important aspect in restoring the balance between economic development and
earth’s resources is changing the way in which energy is generated. Since the Industrial
Revolution, fossils fuels have become the most dominant source for energy. In 2019, coal,
oil and gas still accounted for almost 80 per cent of the global primary energy consumption. However, the energy mix is fast decarbonizing. According to the International Energy
Agency (IEA), fossil fuels will peak this decade, while non-fossil energy sources have become
dominant in the supply of energy. Renewables sources of energy are gaining in importance
fast. The rapid advancement of technologies allows increased yield and lowered costs.
For instance, wind turbines have been in existence for more than a century; however, the
upscaling of the technology over the past decades has resulted in reduced pricing and a
sharp increase in its deployment. In the rapid changing energy market, old technologies
are becoming obsolete, new technologies are being developed and new companies are
entering the arena.
One example of a new company is SolarDuck, established in 2019 in the Netherlands. As
a spin-off of Damen Shipyards, the biggest shipbuilder in the Netherlands and a prominent
member of the Dutch offshore industry, SolarDuck was founded on the conviction that
wind energy alone will not suffce. Large parts of the world population are living in windscarce but sun-rich regions. Solar energy is the most competitive form of renewable energy
in these parts of the world. However, land constraints are becoming increasingly apparent.
One solution is to let solar foat on inland waters like lakes. However, many islands and
energy dense locations around the world have no sizeable inland waters at their disposal.
But, many of these locations are located in coastal regions. The ability to deploy solar energy
offshore will open up a new horizon for solar energy. As such, SolarDuck primarily focuses
on more benign locations such as sun-rich regions in South East Asia, the Mediterranean
and the Caribbean.
Since the start of the company in 2019, it has seen a rapid development. By the end of
2020, it had fled its frst patents, which included the triangular-shaped platforms, which
is unique for SolarDuck. As triangles have three axes of rotational freedom, it can far better cope with waves than a square-shaped platform and thus is one of the cornerstones of
the SolarDuck design. Beginning in 2021, it launched its frst foating powerplant. Damen
Shipyards constructed this frst plant. For practical reasons related to permitting and accessibility, the system was not located offshore but in the river Waal, the biggest river of the
Netherlands. To show its ability to withstand extreme conditions, the powerplant was
towed 50 kilometres upstream to its testing site near the city of Tiel. In August 2021, SolarDuck received an Approval in Principle of the certifcation agency Bureau Veritas, which was
a world’s frst for offshore foating solar technology. Both in developing the technology and
in commercialization, the ability to leverage the expertise of others is vital for the growth
of SolarDuck.
Partnering constitutes the cornerstone for further developing the business. From an
operational perspective, SolarDuck requires specifc competencies and the ability to
Alliance partner selection
41
allow for worldwide scaling. These factors play a dominant role in assessing partner ft.
SolarDuck aims to be a technology integrator: subcontractors produce the semi-fnished
products, and fnal assembly and commissioning takes place close to the project site,
which can be anywhere in the world. This requires a range of supply-chain partners.
Based on dependencies, specifc arrangements are made, ranging to extensive partnership structures for highly specialized components. In other words, being a small and
relatively young company with pre-bankable technology, its global reach can only be
realized through forging alliances. The alliance approach ranges from relatively simple
intermediation agreements with well-networked local representatives to multi-purpose
strategic partnerships.
The Dutch offshore industry has been taking advantage of the offshore wind developments that have taken place on the North Sea. The Netherlands aims to have 11.5Gw
installed capacity by 2030. The execution of these ambitions relies on a close cooperation
between states and private parties that are able to develop and deploy the required technology. In September 2021, SolarDuck signed a partnership with the Dutch developer
Pondera for development projects located in the Netherlands and South East Asia. Since
the start of the company in 2007, Pondera has played a critical role in reducing greenhouse
gas emissions as, with their (global) projects, they support the transition to a renewable
energy system. Offering consultancy services to a variety of clients, Pondera’s offerings
range from government policy research to supporting renewable energy project development at all stages of the project lifecycle. In the partnership, SolarDuck contributes
the technology, whereas Pondera brings in its project development and project fnancing
expertise. In 2022, SolarDuck and RWE forged a partnership. Established in 1898, the
Rheinisch-Westfälisches-Elekrizitätswerk (RWE) had a vision to provide low-cost energy by
establishing large-scale powerplants and high-performance grids, which included factories and households. In 2009, RWE became a major player in the Dutch energy market after
the takeover of Dutch-based Essent B.V. After several restructurings, RWE became one of
the world’s largest renewable energy producers. In 2021, RWE announced its investment
and growth strategy ‘Growing Green’, in which it will invest 50 billion Euro until 2030 in
the energy transition. As part of that strategy, RWE actively scouts new technologies that
can support the energy transitions and supports (smaller sized) companies in developing those technologies to be relevant in utility scale energy generation. Responding to
the Dutch offshore wind tender ‘Hollandse Kust West’ (HKW), both parties engaged in
negotiation to include SolarDuck technology in the bid for HKW. As a result of these negotiations, RWE committed to invest in the deployment of SolarDuck’s full-scale offshore
pilot in the North Sea. Next, SolarDuck was selected as the exclusive provider for offshore foating solar PV technology with integrated storage in RWE’s bid for offshore wind
park Hollandse Kust West in the Netherlands. Furthermore, RWE and SolarDuck agreed to
explore and develop offshore foating solar parks in identifed key markets in Europe. On
November 10, 2022, the Dutch authorities awarded the construction of Hollandse Kust
West to RWE, and as a consequence, SolarDuck will be constructing the largest offshore
solar plant up till date.
Pondera’s and RWE’s commitment to support the energy transition represents a valuable
asset for SolarDuck to further accelerate the development of the market and the deployment
of its technology. In assessing these partners, Solar Duck did not only review capabilities and
contributions but also the entrepreneurial spirit of the frms. Since offshore foating solar is
a new market, SolarDuck seeks partners that are willing to further develop this market and
42
Alliance partner selection
take some risk. Next, good personal connections with the people that are responsible for the
alliance is essential in generating value to all partners. Through these alliances, SolarDuck
can further develop its offshore foating solar technology towards bankable, commercial
technology and speed up the roll-out of this new technology globally.

Questions
1
2
3
Regarding resource complementarity, explain how SolarDuck’s resource endowments
interrelate with Pondera’s and RWE’s contributions to the partnership.
Regarding compatibility, which types of partner (mis)ft may SolarDuck experience in
its partnerships with Pondera and RWE? What measures should SolarDuck consider to
reinforce ft and mitigate the efects of misft?
The execution of the alliance was characterized by intense and constructive collaboration among the partners. Describe how the degree of partner (mis)ft may have afected
the partners’ post-formation behaviours.

Note
1 Climate (2022); Clubofrome (2022); Pondera (2022); Ritchie and Roser (2022); RWE (2021, 2022);
SolarDuck (2022); UNFCCC (2022).

4
ALLIANCE NEGOTIATION
Alliance negotiation constitutes yet another critical stage in the alliance development framework. Many alliance initiatives are terminated before they can be executed; if they are executed, the negotiation processes and outcomes establish the foundation for the future progress
of the alliance. This stage entails establishing the actual complementarities in the collaboration and defning carefully the nature and amount of resources that will be available to the
partnership, the ownership, the anticipated outcomes and the contractual provisions. Because
alliance partners are interdependent, reaching an agreement demands some negotiation, usually through a dialogue among representatives of partner frms, with the goal of reaching
outcomes that fulfl the various interests of the partners in a way that is acceptable to everyone. Thus the key questions to be addressed during this stage refer to which negotiation
outcomes will enable the alliance partners to obtain the greatest possible level of synergy, and
what negotiation outcomes would provide the best deal for the partner frms.To inform their
alliance negotiations, negotiators thus need a good understanding of the differences among
various negotiation strategies and tactics (described in the frst section), as well as how to
value their resource contributions responsibly (shown in the second section).The following
two sections provide a systematic framework with a set of decision-making steps for alliance
negotiation and a summary.The fnal section concludes with a case illustration.

Negotiation behaviour
Firms establish alliances to maximize synergies by aligning potentially complementary
resources. The partner frms remain independent though, so to be successful in an alliance
negotiation, they must recognize their conficting aims (Das and Kumar 2010). First, they
need an outcome that maximizes the potential value of the alliance. Second, they need to
protect their individual frms’ interest and negotiate an outcome that maximizes value for the
frm specifcally. Negotiating an alliance thus entails seeking a relationship between partners
that enables them to achieve business success together, without either partner needing to
accept a loss of fnances, identity or independence (Child and Faulkner 1998). Alliance partners should conclude their negotiations with the feeling that they have achieved a workable
deal that benefts them individually as well.To resolve this conundrum, negotiation behaviour
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-4
44
Alliance negotiation
encompasses all activities exploited by negotiators during a negotiation process, with the
aim of coming to terms with the negotiating partner.To this end, negotiators formulate and
deploy different strategies and tactics, switching among them as alliance negotiations progress
(Thompson 1990).

Negotiation strategies
A negotiation strategy refects a party’s disposition towards reconciling and integrating the
interests of the partners. Prior research has remarked that negotiation strategies typically have
been categorized as either integrative or distributive (Kersten 2001). Integrative negotiations
address (and attempt to accommodate) the underlying interests of both parties, which is useful
for generating joint gain, particularly in positive-sum negotiations. In such a negotiation situation, the amount of benefts to be divided is variable (i.e. unknown), and partners may proft
without sacrifce if they can increase the overall pie. Moreover, partner interests likely converge
because their value realization depends on their long-term commitment. Integrative negotiation enables partners to solve problems, develop win–win solutions, achieve value creation and
create synergies beyond what would have been possible alone (Pruitt and Lewis 1975).When
parties adopt a problem-solving orientation, they likely identify similarities in their interests and
pursue common objectives (Ariño and Reuer 2004).Transparency, and the speed and reliability
with which partners learn about each other’s actions, also result in proposals and counterproposals, discussions about the solutions and efforts to uncover mutual interests (Olekalns et al.
1996). To overcome potentially incompatible interests, negotiators seek settlements that are
better for all parties involved. Integrative negotiation thus requires fexibility among parties and
willingness to think creatively in order to discover effcient negotiation outcomes.
In contrast, distributive negotiation seeks to create individual gain by persuading the other
party to make concessions.The focus is on securing individual interests, appropriating value
through the alliance and sharing the pie (Jap 2001), which might be appropriate if the amount
of resources is fxed (i.e. a zero-sum game). Partner interests are often diametrically opposed,
so they focus on the realization of immediate outcomes, even at the expense of their partner.
This type of negotiation is characterized by minimal information exchanges, greater commitment to individual interests and increased hostility (Lax and Sebenius 1986).Yet it also means
the exchange of information is crucial because parties work to maximize the amount of
information they receive while also minimizing the amount of information they grant (Wolfe
and McGinn 2005).The parties’ sole aim is to direct efforts towards negotiation outcomes that
enable them to appropriate future benefts.
Building on these two dimensions, various typologies of negotiation strategies (for an
overview, see Das and Kumar 2010) adopt different foci, including confict cultures (Gelfand
et al. 2006), negotiation models (Lewicki et al. 1992) and negotiation strategies (Pruitt 1983).
By comparing these distinct typologies, we note fve negotiation strategies that appear appropriate as categories for classifying negotiation behaviour (Child and Faulkner 1998). First,
collaborating suggests concern for individual and partner’s interests, with a focus on problem
solving. Second, competing indicates that the primary concern with individual interests leads
to an attempt to force the partner to back down.Third, avoiding means that partners do not
pursue either party’s interests and refuse to consider the issue. Fourth, accommodating suggests that a partner’s interests are the primary concern, so the focal frm backs down. Fifth and
fnally, a compromising strategy indicates moderate concerns for a partner’s interests, such that
they agree to split the difference (see Table 4.1).

Alliance negotiation
45
TABLE 4.1 Negotiation strategies and tactics
Description
Tactics
Implications
Collaborating
Primary concern for
individual and partner’s
interests; focus on
problem solving.

Primary focus on
soft tactics to build
high-quality working
relationship; hard
tactics only employed
to defend interests.

Strengthening of
pre-existing
relationships;
preventing confict
escalation.

Competing
Primary concern for
individual interests;
focus on imposing
outcomes on
counterpart.

Focus on hard tactics
to exploit power
advantage and obtain
compliance.

Jeopardizing long-term
relationships; conficts
that are costly to
resolve.

Avoiding
Limited concern for
individual and partner’s
interests; focus on
neglecting negotiation.

Limited use of tactics.

Integrative solution
is not achieved,
likelihood of
premature dissolution.

Accommodating
Primary concern for
partner’s interests; focus
on compliance with
counterpart’s demands.

Primary focus on hard
and rational tactics to
deal pre-emptively
with counterpart’s
demand.

Short-term success,
but risk of exploitation
remains because an
integrative outcome is
not achieved.

Compromising
Moderate concern for
individual and partner’s
interests; focus on quick
consensus solutions.

Primary focus on
rational tactics to
obtain compliance.

Short-term success,
but fundamental issues
persist as the alliance
progresses.

Sources: Das and Kumar (2010); Lax and Sebenius (1986); Rao and Schmidt (1998).

In a comparison of these negotiation approaches, collaborating seems fruitful for alliance
negotiations (Das and Kumar 2010) because it maximizes the negotiation outcome through a
strong focus by both parties on each other’s and their own outcomes.To develop win–win alliances, partners need to negotiate generously and ensure that their partner receives a good deal,
which might mean sub-optimal immediate outcomes as they lay the groundwork for longterm success. Negotiators may be more sensitive to the absence of agreement than to failure
to attain an ideal agreement.With fexibility, frms are willing to back down from their initial
interests and consider alternative negotiation solutions. Although collaborating cannot guarantee a successful negotiation even if employed by all partners, it is likely to result in outcomes
associated with trust-building. If partners invest in relational capital during their initial alliance
negotiations, they should enjoy collaborative decision making as the alliance progresses. Moreover, collaborative negotiations are often supplemented by informal, collective sense-making
processes that contribute to enhance partner interactions as the alliance progresses.

Negotiation tactics
Negotiation tactics refer to the means used to execute the negotiation strategy. Parties can use
a variety of negotiation instruments to achieve this objective (Lax and Sebenius 1986). For
46
Alliance negotiation
example, through communication and persuasion, a negotiator may coerce another party to
accept a compensation structure that conficts with its interests. A frm might present information in such a manner that it looks like a win–win situation, even if it benefts that focal
frm primarily. Some negotiators derive power from their possession of specialized knowledge
or unique information. Identifying with a charismatic person, which often relies on the negotiator’s skill in building good personal relationships, also may exert infuence, as can advocacy
of normative conformity (i.e. claiming that a position is correct, legitimate or principled).To
organize these distinct types of tactics, a three-category classifcation is identifed: hard, soft
and rational (Kipnis and Schmidt 1985; Rao and Schmidt 1998).
Hard tactics generally result when negotiators develop a subjective assessment that the counterpart will comply with their demands.This assessment causes them to develop a focus on maximizing their own value and pursuing whatever joint positive value is available.As a leading principle,
they aim to fulfl self-interest by creating fear in the opposing party, using threats, demands and
sanctions. Because counterparts face high costs if they fail to comply, they usually accommodate
the hard negotiators’ demands.This scenario also implies reduced dependency, in that the negotiator will describe the multiple alternatives available to realize its objectives, while increasing the
partner’s dependence and switching costs, such as by setting frm deadlines, demanding concessions, acting forcefully or threatening to terminate negotiations. Such hard infuence tactics seek
to weaken the other party’s position, increase the credibility of the negotiator’s own position and
impose negotiation outcomes. In the case of conficts, contracts supported by legal systems serve
to resolve the situation.With a focus on differences, these power-based negotiations are characterized by a strong motivation to pursue individual interests at the expense of the partner.
Soft tactics instead emphasize friendliness and assume counterparts have an option of noncompliance with little cost. Thus the aim is to strive for fairness by building a high-quality
relationship marked by interpersonal liking, a sense of obligation and reciprocity. Compliance
through soft tactics arises because of the bilateral focus and concern for partners’ interests. For
example, negotiators may emphasize interdependence and actively communicate the limited
number of alternatives. Another indicator of soft tactics is a willingness to make alliancespecifc investments, which signals commitment and a voluntary exposure to potential exploitation (i.e. a hold-up situation).These infuence tactics thus emphasize openness, informality
and long-time horizons. If conficts emerge, their resolution proceeds through active consensus seeking and joint problem solving, with a focus on what partners have in common rather
than their differences. Soft tactics indicate a strong motivation to seek solutions and identify a
binding common objective, as well as a willingness to recognize both sides’ interests as valid.
Rational tactics rely on logic, data and information to obtain compliance. They feature
unemotional arguments, but compliance is not taken for granted. The aim is to persuade a
counterpart through objective information; the logically presented facts and information cause
any request to appear detailed and well prepared.The negotiator also comes off as a competent
and reasonable counterpart. Gaining compliance then requires a bilateral focus and concern
for partners’ interests. For example, negotiators might emphasize facts and fgures related to
joint business development, industry dynamics and other sources of relevant information.

Negotiation dynamics
To resolve the tension between common and individual interests—and despite our distinction between them—alliance negotiations tend to feature both integrative and distributive
negotiation approaches. For example, to fnd solutions, parties might prefer joint gain but also
Alliance negotiation
47
seek a solution that maximizes their own gain, if they can convince the partner to accept it.
Switching between approaches is diffcult, however; it involves role reversal by the negotiators,
which may be misinterpreted.Alliance negotiations often involve a mixture of trust-building
and bargaining power games, which can reinforce a perception of mixed signals about longterm commitment. In addition, adopting an integrative strategy poses a risk because the party
becomes vulnerable to opportunism in the negotiation. Being open about one’s own interests
and preferences to achieve joint gains might provoke a partner to adopt a distributive orientation and exploit this openness to strengthen its own position.Yet proactively adopting a
distributive orientation can be perceived as hostile, which may fuel a negative escalation in
the negotiation.That is, a distributive strategy may minimize vulnerability to exploitation, but
it leaves signifcant potential joint gain on the table.
Negotiators tend to have learned about distributive strategies and hard tactics, but in alliance negotiations specifcally, such tactics produce sub-optimal results.Alliances require more
integrative negotiation strategies and soft tactics. A key success factor in any negotiation is
recognizing the importance of the relationship, so negotiators might consider the following
approaches (Das and Kumar 2010; Pruitt and Lewis 1975):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Develop super-ordinate goals. Negotiators should focus on developing super-ordinate
goals rather than pursuing individual targets. With such a focus, negotiators can resolve
conficts and seek negotiation outcomes in both partners’ interests.
Consider interests. Positions are the demands the negotiator makes; interests are the underlying demands. By concentrating on interests, negotiators can identify shared and incompatible interests, isolate the latter as potential deal breakers and continue the negotiation.
Separate people from the problem. Personal involvement often translates into emotions,
perceptions and beliefs that deteriorate judgemental capabilities. By excluding such
involvement, negotiators can focus on the problem instead of personalities.
Make multiple proposals.With more than one option, the negotiator can identify what
the other party values and develop creative trade-offs.
Engage in creative thinking.The act of creation needs to be separate from judgements of
alternatives.
Focus on fair.When confronted with incompatible interests, the parties need to understand and agree on fairness criteria.
Work towards clarity. Negotiators should defne the scope, objectives, priorities, important tasks, milestones and performance measures for their negotiation.

Alliance negotiation skills can be learned. In general, enhanced negotiation and contracting
skills are often manifested in an increased level of contractual detail. For example, Reuer and
Ariño (2007) fnd that prior relationships (i.e. learning) lead to less detailed coordination provisions but do not have an effect on enforcement provisions. Ryall and Sampson (2009) show
that frms with prior deals tend to write more detailed contracts regarding partners’ rights and
obligations, and with more extensive penalty clauses. Ariño et al. (2014) show that the length
of prior relationships has a U-shaped association with negotiating time, such that the length
of a prior relationship will lower the negotiation time at frst, but then it increases the negotiation time. In addition, their results indicate that the length of prior relationships moderates
the effect of procedures for termination on negotiation time but not the effect of fnancial
consequences of termination. Taken together, these fndings suggest that alliance negotiators learn from prior (negotiation) experiences with partners: they tend to tailor contractual
48
Alliance negotiation
stipulations and details to the specifc alliance context and adapt negotiation strategies to new
emerging circumstances (e.g. trust as substitute for contractual detail) as the alliance advances.

Valuation
Valuing partners’ resource contributions is both important and diffcult (Child and Faulkner
1998).Alliance negotiations tend to be lengthy and confdential, and market mechanisms (i.e.
price) are rarely appropriate for valuing resources.The future value of resource contributions
is also uncertain because value creation depends on the partners’ commitment to make the
alliance work. Decisions with respect to the alliance design may also affect this valuation. For
example, the boundaries of an alliance are clearly demarcated in a joint venture, but nonequity alliances tend to have diffuse boundaries. And yet, an alliance negotiation absolutely
necessitates resource valuation because value assessments directly affect negotiation behaviour (Contractor and Ra 2000). In this inexact process, partners’ attitudes, and the way they
get managed and evolve over time, play a key role. Furthermore, valuations of contributions
largely depend on the measurability of those contributions.Tangible resources such as fxed
assets offer high measurability, so negotiators likely have a clear assessment of their value,
perhaps based on (market) costs, uniqueness, replacement value or net present value calculated on the basis of an expected income stream and discount rate.Working capital might be
valued at face value, unless there are reasons to discount it, such as when a joint venture will
incorporate bad debts. Intangible resources are diffcult to measure due to their tacit nature,
and their valuation is more likely to result in conficts and disagreements between partners.
To provide some insights on valuation, Contractor (2001) distinguishes three types of intangible resources: intellectual property rights, intellectual assets and human and organizational
capital. Intellectual property rights (IPR) are formally registered assets, such as patents and
brand names, which makes them relatively easy to transfer among alliance partners. To value
IPR, negotiators likely use a market-based benchmark. For example, it is possible to assign a
value to a brand name by employing a market mechanism: frms are often willing to pay large
sums to obtain the rights to such brands. Intellectual assets comprise both IPR and codifed
but unregistered corporate knowledge, such as drawings, software, databases, manuals and trade
secrets—in written form, but deliberately not registered with government authorities. Measuring such resources becomes more diffcult, as does their transferability, although it is diffcult to
attribute a value to such resources except perhaps through royalties and commissions for sales.
Human and organizational capital refers to uncodifed know-how or expertise that resides in
employees’ skills, routines and organizational culture.These resources are the most diffcult to
measure and often inseparable from the frm. For example, expertise is generally ignored in
valuation exercises, even though it might constitute a key motive for forging an alliance.Technological capabilities are similarly diffcult to value due to their intangible nature, though royalties, licence agreements and discount calculations could provide some insights.Thus whereas
tangible assets are often valued at their cost, the valuation of intangible assets tends to be
ignored or assigned a value on the basis of equity principles (Child and Faulkner 1998).

Alliance negotiation: decision-making steps
Negotiations in alliances must achieve win–win outcomes because the partners ultimately
seek a long-term relationship.To increase the likelihood of smooth collaboration, it is important that partners consider alliance negotiations a positive-sum game, in which integrative
Alliance negotiation
Pre-negotiation
1
Assemble alliance
negotiation team
2
Set the agenda
and strategy
Negotiation
3
Share
information
4
Assess compatibility
and chemistry
Post-negotiation
5
Balance between interests
and consider trade-offs
FIGURE 4.1
6
Establish relevant
documentation
7
Decision to proceed
49
Assemble negotiation team members, including alliance promoter,
operational managers and alliance managers, designate advisors,
including legal and financial.
Set negotiation agenda and negotiation bandwidth, identify
priorities and deal breakers, assess counterpart’s negotiation
history and formulate negotiation strategy and tactics.
Approach partner and formulate and sign, if required, a
confidentiality agreement, a non-disclosure agreement and a
Heads of Agreement.
Engage in active information sharing, not hiding information; be
open and transparent, without forcing a deal too early.
Create mutual awareness of individual and common interests.
Focus on building a high-quality working relationship, as the
negotiation climate shapes the operational working climate.
Recognize and explicate (in)compatibilities in strategic,
organizational, operational, cultural and human fit .
Formulate proposals and counterproposals and remain inquisitive
about the counterpart’s interests.
Propose creative trade-off solutions to resolve stalemates.

Document negotiation outcomes in a draft Memorandum of
Understanding (limited legal enforcement) or a contract (legal
enforcement) (see alliance design for more details).
Conduct final assessment of negotiation processes and outcomes
in light of initial alliance objectives.
Produce a definitive alliance contract or Memorandum of
Understanding.

Decision-making steps: alliance negotiation
negotiations supported by soft tactics lead to better outcomes for all partners. Their efforts
should focus on learning their partner’s concerns, considering benefts and costs, becoming
aware of their partner’s negotiation strengths (i.e. bargaining power) and accommodating
each other in valuing resource contributions.To guide successful alliance negotiations, we distinguish three negotiation stages—pre-negotiation, negotiation and post-negotiation—each
with multiple steps, as we detail next (see Figure 4.1).

Pre-negotiation
During the pre-negotiation stage, a frm prepares for the alliance negotiation by assembling
an alliance team and formulating a negotiation strategy. In addition, each party should gather
all possible information about the partner in terms of its current position, including its fnancial status, key capabilities, vulnerabilities, personnel, technologies and key markets.The frm
might simultaneously undertake a similar analysis of its own organization to fnd any potential
(in)compatibilities.A combination of these activities helps the frm to calculate its negotiation
bandwidth before entering the actual negotiation stage.

50
Alliance negotiation
Step 1: assemble alliance negotiation team
Assembling an effective alliance negotiation team can prevent the escalation of tension during negotiations, which might occur when a single negotiator becomes too emotionally
involved and loses a sense of objective judgement.All involved partners should establish their
own teams, set to take part cooperatively at the negotiating table. In addition, the negotiation teams should have access to all information gathered in preceding alliance development
stages (i.e. strategy formulation and partner selection). The team generally consists of an
alliance promoter (or champion), senior-level managers, operational managers and alliance
managers. The alliance promoter works to gain trust, support and legitimacy within the
organization while also establishing the vision for the alliance, informing important actors
and procuring suffcient resources within the organization. The senior managers need to
take part in discussions related to fnancial and strategic objectives; they also can encourage
frm-wide commitment to the alliance. Involving operational managers, such as division
heads, fnancial managers and technical or marketing managers—that is, the people who will
execute the alliance—gives a sense of operational ft and helps build support for decisions and
trust. Finally, alliance managers, who are responsible for alliance execution and day-to-day
operations, should receive support from both alliance partners and thus must be involved in
the negotiations. Legal and tax professionals might help formalize partnerships, but because
the main objective of the negotiation stage is to create a business framework, they rarely join the
negotiation team, functioning instead as advisors, especially when the negotiation and
alliance design stages are concurrent.

Step 2: set the agenda and strategy
In the next step, but still in advance of the actual negotiation, the team attempts to set the
agenda. Coming to a negotiation table without suffcient preparation can hinder both the
process and its outcomes. After identifying negotiation issues, the team should establish its
negotiation bandwidth to determine the worst possible condition it would accept in relation
to each specifc issue.The step-by-step process therefore encompasses the following:
1
2
3
4
Establish a list of negotiation points, including the alliance strategy and objectives, the
resources provided by the different parties, protections and how to deal with changes.
Develop a common view of deal breakers and how to deal with them.
Gather information about the negotiation history of the potential partner, perhaps from
network contacts, including the experience and background of its counterpart’s negotiation team.When the alliance includes a foreign partner, a critical judgement relates to the
level of knowledge of the foreign business culture.
Use this information to determine a negotiation strategy and tactics for each negotiation
issue. For example, negotiating about the value of intangible resources favours an integrative
strategy, whereas negotiating fnancial compensation benefts from a distributive strategy.

A frm may also approach its counterpart and decide together to formulate and sign a confdentiality agreement (i.e. non-disclosure agreement) to regulate the information exchanged
during the negotiation and protect them from unwanted interference by external stakeholders. For example, a joint venture announcement tends to infuence stockholder value, so the
confdentiality agreement might prevent the parties from discussing the negotiations with
Alliance negotiation
51
stockholders or the market. In addition, the basic principles of the alliance agreement might
be formalized in a letter of intent or Heads of Agreement. Such a document enables the parties to concentrate on establishing the fundamental principles of the venture, provides a basis
for public announcements, helps keep negotiations moving forward and provides a draft for
the defnitive alliance agreement. Even when these emerge, they are rarely legally binding.
During this pre-negotiation stage, parties may request due diligence, perhaps to assess fnancial
matters and technology.The results of this exercise help negotiators assess the value of inputs,
outputs and organizational requirements.

Negotiation
During the negotiation stage, negotiation teams meet in person and jointly develop an alliance
roadmap by exchanging relevant information, assessing their computability and chemistry, balancing their interests and considering alternatives.We analytically distinguish these activities,
but they are often simultaneous.The primary risk in this stage is that negotiators might place
too much emphasis on their frm’s rather than shared interests, creating tense alliance negotiations.Thus all parties should monitor actively the level of anxiety and manage it if necessary.

Step 3: share information
Alliance negotiation means information sharing, and the objective is two-fold: to strengthen
relations between the potential partners and their negotiators, and to obtain a shared understanding of super-ordinate goals. Negotiators should expect to abide by the following rules:
•
•
•
•
Be open and honest because hiding relevant information could harm the negotiation
process in a later stage.
Do not force a deal by mentioning legal threats because early meetings have softer objectives, such as getting to know each other and gaining an understanding of the other’s
vision of the alliance and culture.
Balance information sharing and gathering; avoid being an open book while the other
party sits silent and absorbs information.
Share only the information that is relevant for the alliance. Remain aware of not only
what is discussed but also the matters that are not discussed.

Step 4: assess compatibility and chemistry
Good collaborations often feature partners that understand each other and the way their
counterpart works. Assessing compatibility and chemistry is therefore crucial as negotiations
progress. Investing in a stronger relationship pays off when more diffcult negotiation issues
arise, so negotiators should consider several issues. First, with regard to partner ft, they should
understand the areas in which the partner frms are compatible or incompatible. For example,
incompatibility might create confict to the detriment of integrative solutions. Second, they
should assess the support offered by extant senior-level and operational managers of both
sides. A lack of commitment may jeopardize alliance negotiations. Third, negotiators should
assess the degree to which the values and way of doing business are compatible across partners.
Incompatible values may be ignored during negotiations, but they are likely to emerge and
52
Alliance negotiation
create conficts once the alliance is executed. Collective awareness about these issues enables
negotiators to develop solutions before they even arise, which contributes to a relationship
based on mutual trust.

Step 5: balance between interests and consider trade-ofs
Balancing interests is a sensitive matter during alliance negotiations, which inherently involve
conficting objectives and even personal interests.Therefore, one tactic is to have one negotiation team make the frst set of proposals, which prompts inquiry rather than immediate
counter-proposals.The negotiation teams should be oriented towards creating win–win situations through integrative negotiations.With this orientation they also should avoid an emphasis on power or control over the negotiation, which tends to induce distributive negotiation
strategies. Instead negotiators can focus on the potential for mutually benefcial agreements
and try to use problem-solving strategies that support both individual organizations’ goals. For
example, in a careful assessment of the partner’s resource contribution, the negotiator should
take into account human capital, in the form of professional, expertise, reputation and network capital.Yet this analysis also must consider the potential losses that result from investing
in an alliance. Creativity also is required to determine compensation because different alliance
payments provide different incentives. For example, a lump sum fee paid at the start of the
agreement might reduce long-term commitment; royalties, indexed as a percentage of alliance sales, might increase it. Dividends as returns on equity positions also function as mutual
hostages. Commitment to an alliance refects the partners’ motivation to collaborate, which
itself depends on the potential value of the alliances and their anticipated benefts.The goal
is to build trust with the potential partner, create momentum, develop consensus and signal
commitment, through both verbal and non-verbal communication.

Post-negotiation
In the last phase, the negotiation outcomes are transcribed into a legal contract that codifes
each party’s rights, duties and responsibilities and specifes the goals, policies and strategies
underlying the anticipated cooperation.Thus a common understanding must exist regarding
how the results are measured and managed. Governance structures, such as performance management, should have been discussed and accepted in the alliance economics stage so they can
be included in the documentation. Even after such documentation though, the parties must
conduct a fnal check: does the negotiation agreement ft the original alliance objectives, and
have the negotiators established a constructive working climate?

Step 6: establish relevant documentation
The results of the negotiation are documented in a preliminary alliance contract (legally
binding) or Memorandum of Understanding (limited legal enforcement), which contains
an outline of the negotiated points and, if required, issues that need further negotiation.
Other documented elements may include the objective and purpose of the alliance, partners’
resource contributions, a draft of a potential alliance design, division of tasks and responsibilities, decision-making and confict resolutions procedures, rules and procedures in case the
alliance is terminated due to unforeseen events and possible future projects for the alliance
(see Chapter 5 for more details).

Alliance negotiation
53
Step 7: decision to proceed
The last task means completing the alliance negotiation and deciding to initiate the next stage,
alliance launch (see Chapter 6).Therefore, to assess whether the objectives of the negotiation
have been achieved and whether to draw up the defnitive alliance contract, the negotiation
teams must confrm the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
The mission statement is clearly articulated and understood by both parties.
There is a clarity about the alliance design, including governance form, contractual provisions and management control.
There is a clear understanding of the operational, technological, legal, marketing and
decision-making procedures.
Consensus about (resource) inputs has been reached, with balanced trade-offs between
partners.
Both parties intend to continue the alliance until objectives are achieved; however, there
exists a common perception of how to deal with confict.
There is a clear understanding of important issues, including the protection of intellectual
property or ownership rights resulting from the alliance.
There is suffcient insight into the effect of the alliance on organizational processes (managerial, decision making, operational etc.).
The understanding includes the impact on certain organizational departments and
units, with support gained from those affected by any potential reorganization or
disruption.

Summary
In this chapter, we have provided an overview of critical issues in alliance negotiation. Resolving the inherent tension between collaboration and competition requires that negotiators
understand the implications of distinct negotiation approaches and their underlying dynamics.
With such understanding, negotiators can assess the implications of their behaviour, including
confict, which is generally germane to alliance negotiations.The appropriate use of negotiation strategies and tactics provides an effective mechanism for pre-emptively managing conficts about coordination, compensation and contributions. In addition, alliance negotiations
often constitute a frst encounter between partners and, thus, a frst opportunity to develop
relational norms and capital. Distributive negotiations accompanied by hard tactics may let
the frm realize its negotiation objectives, but only at the expense of the counterpart and
to the jeopardy of the alliance’s execution. In contrast, integrative negotiations leading to
win–win outcomes can reinforce initial trust and commitment. High-quality partner interactions are prerequisites for developing productive alliances and constitute an important part of
alliance management. Building on the insights presented, we distinguished three negotiation
stages analytically and suggested that negotiations proceed in this order (the stages are, of
course, interrelated).
Moreover, we distinguish analytically and sequentially between alliance negotiation and
alliance design: in practice, these development stages are often concurrent. For example, negotiations could last from weeks to years—and it would not be advisable for the partners to wait
to document contractual provisions determined six months previously because they want to
conclude the entire negotiation stage frst.

54
Alliance negotiation
CASE: RENAULT–NISSAN1
Renault, the French automotive company, was founded in 1899 and now holds a leading
position in the European and Latin American car markets. Throughout its history, Renault
has introduced ground-breaking cars, such as the Espace and Megane Scenic. In the late
1990s, despite being in a fnancially sound position, Renault recognized that it needed to
make changes in order to remain competitive. At this time the automobile industry exhibited
a pattern of rapid consolidation, and Renault was very dependent on its home market and
nearby European markets. The merger between Daimler and Chrysler in 1998 led Renault to
recognize the need to economize on costs and increase its presence in the global automotive market.
Nissan Motors has produced cars since 1933 (its predecessors having done so since 1914)
and has become one of the leading car manufacturers in the world. As the second-largest
Japanese car manufacturer, after Toyota, Nissan has been able to establish a strong market
presence in the Japanese and Asian markets, the United States and Europe. Starting in 1991,
however, Nissan was confronted with several challenges. It experienced substantial losses
due to decreasing sales in key markets, it was unable to develop successful new models, it
had diffculty standardizing its products and it had a huge debt position of US$20 billion.
To deal with their own adversities and changing industry and market conditions (such as
over-capacity), Renault and Nissan decided to establish an alliance in 1999. Renault’s senior
management realized that an attempt to acquire Nissan would be opposed by key stakeholders and the Japanese public, so it proposed an alliance between the frms, to which Nissan
responded positively. Although both companies were experiencing diffculties and analysts
were sceptical about the alliance, the resource and market complementarity between the
two frms was high. Renault had strong marketing and design capabilities, while Nissan
was renowned for its engineering capabilities. Furthermore, the two companies were geographically complementary to each other: Renault mainly served the European and Latin
American markets, while Nissan served the Japanese, Asian and North American markets.
Renault sought a partner that would provide it with the opportunity to expand from a
regional player into a global player, whereas Nissan was looking for a partner with a strong
fnancial position.
Both companies realized that the cultural distance and experience in working together
would present potential obstacles to forging a win–win partnership. Consequently, they
decided to adopt a non-conventional negotiation approach. Instead of the traditional static
analytical ‘due diligence’ approach, the partners recognized that the key to success was
a climate of mutual trust and proof of both companies’ ability to actually work together.
Prior to the negotiations, the companies’ senior management held numerous discussions
about interests and objectives. The teams were kept small, which enabled them to become
acquainted and to develop a high-quality relationship. After these initial meetings, both
companies selected engineers and managers to form a team that would explore concrete
opportunities of collaboration and possible synergies. As a way of supporting the integrative
nature of the negotiations, no formal goals were imposed on the team, and team members
were encouraged to let go of any cultural stereotypes. The teams examined collaborative
opportunities in a range of areas, such as purchasing, engines and gearboxes, car platforms,
production and international markets. Based on team reports, the senior management from
both frms concluded that suffcient synergies could be realized, so they decided to proceed
with making a deal.

Alliance negotiation
55
The companies signed a Memorandum of Understanding, through which they expressed
a commitment to evaluate further possible synergies and start formal negotiations. During
this period, Renault signalled its commitment by refraining to impose an equity exchange
on Nissan. At that time, Nissan did not have the fnancial resources to fund the acquisition of
Renault shares, and Renault agreed to postpone the matter. Further analysis of the companies’ operations was being made by 21 intercompany teams. Information was shared in an
open atmosphere that was unusual for the car industry.
Renault executives began to further refne the concept of the alliance. Building on past
experiences and reviewing other alliances, such as the Ford–Mazda partnership, emphasis
was placed on fnancial and cultural dimensions. Renault executives took Japanese language
classes, which eased communication. The companies focused on two major issues. First,
during the formal negotiations, the companies had to take account of multiple stakeholders.
For example, Renault was partly state-owned and had strong unions to deal with. Nissan
was part of the Fuyo Keiretsu, in which its most powerful stakeholders (Fuji Bank, Industrial
Bank of Japan, and Dai-Ichi Metal Insurance) were organized. Second, prior to the formal
negotiation, Nissan set four pre-conditions that Renault had to meet: (1) retention of the Nissan name, (2) protection of jobs, (3) support for the restructuring of the Nissan organization
and (4) selection of the CEO from the Nissan organization. Renault was able to meet these
pre-conditions, which allowed both frms to take the next step.
The actual negotiations beneftted from prior investments in relationship building. Both
companies gained an understanding about each other’s backgrounds, believed in the alliance and were fully aware of potential areas for collaboration. Instead of securing private
interests and resorting to distributive tactics, both companies expressed a willingness to
accommodate the other’s interests. However, a serious issue emerged when Nissan asked
Renault to invest US$6 billion to ease fnancial pressure on the Japanese company. Renault
could not accommodate this request, which forced Nissan to explore other alternatives,
including partnerships with DaimlerChrysler and Ford. Recognizing the importance of the
Nissan alliance, Renault arranged additional fnancial resources and approached Nissan to
restart negotiations. Because the Nissan attempt to partner with DaimlerChrysler had failed,
Nissan complied with Renault’s request. Although Renault was not able to provide conclusive fnancial details, it had now obtained a bargaining power advantage. However, it did not
exercise this advantage in the interests of safeguarding the important relationship between
the frms. When negotiations were completed, Renault agreed to invest US$5.4 billion in
exchange for 36.8 per cent of the Nissan Motor shares, 15.2 per cent of the Nissan Diesel
shares and ownership of Nissan’s fnancial subsidiaries in Europe.
The alliance quickly proved successful. For example, Renault Mexico was established in
2000 with Nissan’s support, and Renault was able to re-enter the Australian market in 2001.
In 2000, Nissan established a presence in Brazil with Renault’s help. In 2001, both partners set up a joint purchasing organization: Renault Argentina started importing Nissans
for the Argentinean market, and Renault entered the Indonesian market through the local
Nissan dealer network. In 2002, Nissan was able to buy a 13.5 per cent stake in Renault,
which it increased later that year to 15 per cent, thereby honouring its earlier agreements.
Since then, the alliance has grown and proved successful. In terms of synergies, the alliance
reported savings of more than US$1.5 billion. The alliance now actively promotes sharing
best practices. The ‘Nissan Production Way’ has been the foundation for the ‘Système de
Production Renault’, which is now the standard used by all Renault factories.

56
Alliance negotiation
The collaboration expanded successfully over the years. In 2010, the alliance announced
a broad strategic cooperation with Daimler with the aim of developing small cars and sharing technology. In 2014, the alliance announced that production and development will be
fully integrated, anticipating a cost saving of US$4.3 billion. In 2016, Mitsubishi entered
the alliance as an equal partner after Nissan acquired a controlling stake in Mitsubishi.
In September 2017, the name of the alliance was offcially changed to Renault–Nissan–
Mitsubishi. The alliance became the largest car manufacturer in the world. With regard
to product development, the alliance committed US$4 billion into the development of
electric vehicles, aiming to become the leader in zero-emission transportation. Although
sales have been slower than anticipated, the alliance has delivered six electric car models
as of 2016. Although the alliance has been performing well, there has been a confict over
control since 2014. Despite the fact that Nissan is far larger than Renault, Renault has a far
larger voting stake in Nissan. Moreover, Renault is well represented in the Board of Nissan.
Next, in 2014, the French Government passed the ‘Florange Law’ to strengthen French
shareholder control over French companies. Being the largest shareholder in Renault, this
meant that the French state could increase its voting power in Nissan. This tension was
manged by a pledge by Renault that it would never oppose the Nissan Board at a company
shareholder meeting. The arrest of Carlos Ghosn, then the CEO of both Nissan and Renault,
led to tensions, as the French wanted a merger between Renault and Nissan and to name
the next Chairmen of Nissan. Nissan did not agree with these demands.
Despite these conficts, all three partners regard the alliance as vital for long-term viability. However, the structure of the alliance was changed in 2019 through the signing of
a Memorandum of Understanding by which an Alliance Operating Board was established
which operates under supervision of a Chairman and the three CEOs as equal members
(Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance). In January 2022, the alliance announced a common
roadmap for the alliance, named Alliance 2030, in which it will further increase the use
of common platforms while deploying a ‘smart differentiation strategy’. The partners will
invest a total of US$26 billion in fve years’ time to support electrifcation leading to 35 new
EV models by 2030.

Questions
1
2
3
Renault and Nissan adopted a non-conventional negotiation approach. How does this
approach difer from a traditional approach, and to what extent has it contributed to the
success of the alliance?
How did the diverging organizational, cultural and institutional backgrounds of Renault
and Nissan afect the negotiation trajectory in terms of negotiation approach, processes
and outcomes?
Considering the Renault–Nissan alliance, how do governments infuence alliance negotiations, and what tactics can partners use to deal with this infuence?

Note
1 Globenewswire (2022a); Horrel (2016); Lewis (2004); Renault (2010); Renault–Nissan–
Mitsubishi Alliance (2022); Weis (2011); corporate website: www.nissan-global.com/EN/index.
html (accessed 2 August 2011).

5
ALLIANCE DESIGN
The problem of how alliance partners can exercise suffcient control over the direction of
their alliance is well recognized. In the alliance design stage, partner frms confront the challenge of designing an alliance structure that provides them with suffcient control to realize
their objectives. Insuffcient control limits a partner’s ability not only to protect but also to use
the resources it provides effciently. Alliance partners thus are motivated to create an alliance
design that fulfls the following objectives: to increase the likelihood of attaining individual
and collective objectives, to create safeguards to reduce the impact of potential exchange hazards and to increase their ability to respond to unforeseen circumstances.The guiding questions for this stage thus refer to the most suitable governance form, the required contractual
provisions and the supplementary management controls to be installed.To this end, managers must understand the primary function of governance forms (shown in the frst section),
alliance contracts (second section) and management control (third section). In addition, the
following two sections discuss how these design elements interrelate, and they provide a systematic, fve-step framework to assist alliance managers in their alliance design decisions.The
chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

Governance form
A governance form consists of the confguration of an alliance’s structural building blocks,
which aim to organize the partners’ coordination and contractual enforcement legally (Williamson 1985).With minimum cost, an appropriate governance form can ensure the control
that parties need before they will come to believe that engaging in the alliance will be of
beneft to them (Dyer 1997). Accordingly, a governance form should align parties’ interests
by creating an incentive structure that stimulates the creation of long-term gains through
cooperation, while reducing short-term gains from competition. In addition to its coordinative function, an appropriate governance form also reduces the likelihood of exchange hazards
and, in turn, contributes positively to the likelihood of superior alliance performance. The
primary purpose is to protect alliance partners against two types of exchange hazards: (1)
opportunistic behaviour and (2) misappropriation of benefts.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-5
58
Alliance design
Williamson (1975) defnes opportunistic behaviour as self-interested behaviour with guile,
which may include making hollow promises or window-dressing efforts, unresponsiveness,
unreasonable demands, misrepresentations of abilities, a reluctance to fulfl a commitment,
withholding and incomplete disclosure of information, expropriation of know-how and/
or exploitation of partner-specifc assets (Williamson 1985).Various forms of opportunistic
behaviour emerge in alliance contexts, including the hold-up problem (Klein et al. 1978),
shirking (Wathne and Heide 2000) and free riding (Hennart and Zeng 2005):
•
•
•
Hold-up problems arise when one party exploits the other party’s dependence on the
alliance, often due to the presence of assets and investments with value specifc to the
relationship, which thus creates incentives for opportunism. If a party is tied to the alliance through specialized investments, it cannot dissolve the alliance without incurring
substantial costs associated with the loss of non-recoverable investments.
Shirking refers to situations in which one party avoids its obligations and contracted
duties to increase its own short-term rewards (e.g. immediate cost saving), even though
doing so imposes costs on the alliance and jeopardizes long-term value creation.
Free riding arises when one party fails to fulfl its obligations to supply the required
inputs to its partner. For example, if parties contractually agree to exploit resources, but it
is diffcult to determine if the agreed amount or quality of resources has been provided,
a party that fails to provide its share reaps additional benefts from its free riding.

After an alliance has formed, parties may have concerns about the misappropriation of their
benefts too (Gulati and Singh 1998). Appropriation concerns originate from the presence
of behavioural uncertainty, combined with the diffculties of specifying intellectual property
rights, as well as the challenges of contractual monitoring and enforcement (Oxley 1997).
Uncertainties associated with future performance and problems in observing partners’ contributions aggravate the potential that a party might not receive its anticipated share of benefts.
The presence of a knowledge component in an alliance raises additional appropriation concerns because knowledge is diffcult to bind, monitor and codify.A partner frm may acquire
valuable knowledge that is not part of the initial alliance agreement and use it for purposes
outside the alliance (Khanna 1998). As the alliance develops, the likelihood of such misappropriation may increase as a result of various internal and external dynamics (Yan and Zeng
1999), which could give rise to goal conficts. Goal conficts constitute a threat to alliance
continuity in that incompatible or misaligned goals reduce the incentives for parties to cooperate and contribute to the achievement of the other party’s objectives.
In order to determine the extent to which they need to safeguard against exchange hazards, frms need to assess the level of governance required. A frst decision relates to the type
of governance form, which differs when alliance partners take actual ownership of the alliance
structure (e.g. joint venture) versus when they rely on non-equity-based arrangements.

Non-equity and equity-based governance forms
A non-equity arrangement implies that the alliance agreement is organized through an alliance contract, without any transfer of equity between the partners (Pisano 1989).This type of
arrangement is relatively easily established because it relies solely on a relatively simple contractual
agreement.The rules of the game are well specifed, and a failure by either party to deliver on
the contracted commitments can be resolved through litigation. Non-equity arrangements often
Alliance design
59
involve a series of small tasks or projects, even if over a long period, but one party usually dominates, such that relationship power and information are asymmetrical. Non-equity arrangements
mimic market transactions and exclude relational elements, so the contractual terms of exchange
are binding and specifc, and effciencies of the market exchange enable them to maximize their
profts (Ganesan 1993). Examples of such partnerships include production or marketing alliances,
which offer the key advantage of speed in forging the relationship. Because of the low degree
of integration and reciprocal relationships, partners can dissolve these relationships with minimal
costs. However, non-equity arrangements offer only limited protection against exchange hazards
and demand increasingly explicit and close controls over alliance activities and partner behaviour.
In contrast, in an equity-based arrangement, the partners transfer equity or establish a new
organizational entity, called a joint venture (see Box 5.1), in which they both participate with
BOX 5.1 JOINT VENTURES: A SEPARATE STREAM OF RESEARCH
A joint venture (JV) is a newly established organization created by two or more parties,
generally characterized by shared ownership, shared returns and risks and shared governance; They resemble hierarchy-based organizations. Setting up a separate legal entity
is expensive and often time-consuming, and as a consequence, fexibility is reduced.
Yet JVs ofer proft-and-loss transparency, long-term incentives and a minimal threat
to the partner frms’ images in case of a reputational stumble. Due to these unique
properties within the broader alliance feld, a separate stream of research emerged,
addressing a variety of topics inherently tied to this equity-based alliance arrangement.
Here we suggest that generic alliance insights, however, also apply to joint ventures,
although specifc topics warrant attention when a JV is the preferred governance form.
For example, specifc attention needs to be given to the number of partners included,
the valuation of initial contributions and the ownership split among the parents. To
avoid adversities, clarity about the geographic, product, technology and value-chain
scope is required. The legal form needs to support the JV’s objectives and should be
aligned with the incentive system. Governance and control pertains to generic alliance
coordination mechanisms, but specifc attention needs to be given to board composition, management structure and stafng. As part of the alliance contract, exit and evolution provisions need to be stipulated to curb exit-adversities and organize a smooth
withdrawal/divestment. As partners work together in a new organization, cultural,
organizational and operational alignment is prerequisite, as well as setting-up parent–JV
interfaces. Exploring these themes more in-depth, initial research focused primarily
on the motives and design of joint ventures and explored for example the antecedents
and consequences of equity stakes (Yan and Luo 2001). The ownership structure (e.g.
minority, 50/50, majority stake) is for example shown to impact the parent frm incentive schemes (e.g. dividend and proft sharing), the parent’s strategies (e.g. market scope)
and governance and control of a JV (e.g. board composition). More recently, studies
explored JV processes and dynamics, including topics such as how minority owners in
a joint venture can proactively deal with conficts and prevent premature JV termination (Westman and Thorgren 2016) and how parent companies, JV organization and
JV environment co-evolve (van der Meer-Kooistra and Kamminga 2015). A subset of
60
Alliance design
studies focuses on international joint ventures (IJVs). Viewed as vehicles for market
entry and learning, IJVs pose specifc management challenges due to cross-cultural differences (Reuer et al. 2014). For example, countries may have specifc rules and regulations with regard to JV formation and legal forms, organizations may have diferent
practices, tensions may exist between foreign and local control and people may have
diferent values and norms. Taken together, (I)JVs represent a unique alliance arrangement with an idiosyncratic set of management tasks. It is beyond the scope of this book
to go into detail on all intricacies, however, extant literature on (I)JVs is available.
Sources: Kogut (1988); Reuer et al. (2014); van der Meer-Kooistra and Kamminga
(2015); Westman and Thorgren (2016); Yan and Luo (2001).

equity (Hennart 1988).The exchange of equity thus provides an additional protection against
exchange hazards because partners become dependent on each other to achieve their objectives. Equity-based arrangements usually refect a long-term commitment and a sense of mutual
cooperation, shared risks and benefts.They are characterized by high levels of interdependence,
fnancial and organizational integration, and often extensive contracts.The main advantage of
such equity-based alliances is the partial ownership and the direct control that follows from it.
Ownership also assures greater transparency in terms of shared costs, potential revenue and risks.
Direct control reduces the risk of opportunistic partner behaviour because of the higher likelihood of detection. However, equity-based alliances also require increased integration, which
may cause problems in felds such as fnance, human resources or information technology.
Furthermore, if equity is exchanged, frms must determine whether to opt for a minority,
an equal or a majority share. If a frm has less than 50 per cent of the equity, it has less control
over the alliance, acquires fewer profts and usually needs to expend more effort in lobbying
activities to infuence the process and results. However, the risks involved are relatively lower,
the impact on the organization is smaller and the demands on management resources decline.
In contrast, when the frm has more than a 50 per cent equity share, it takes more responsibility for the alliance process and invests more in the partnership; it also obtains more control
over alliance processes, can push its own interests to the front and reaps a relatively larger
share of the created value. Finally, in an equal share arrangement, the partners share costs and
risks equally, and their interest and commitment are equally important. However, this form
demands complex control, agreement from all participants and a loss of speed.
A specifc type of equity-based alliance is the joint venture (see Box 5.1): partner frms
establish and become owners of a new independent entity. They resemble hierarchy-based
organizations, such that joint ventures are subject to different problems than market exchangetype alliances, including the need to design coordination and misappropriation tactics. Setting
up a separate legal entity is expensive and often time-consuming; the new entity must then
build its own image and reputation. Finally, fexibility is minimal because the strong organizational and fnancial relationships between the partners impede either’s effort to exit, possibly including high exit fees. Despite these disadvantages, joint ventures offer proft-and-loss
transparency, shared and direct control through partial ownership, long-term incentives and a
minimal threat to the partner frms’ images in case of a reputational stumble.
Both non-equity and equity arrangements can enable frms to realize their objectives,
but they do so in different ways, which infuence frms’ governance decisions (see Table 5.1).

TABLE 5.1 Non-equity and equity-based arrangements
Non-equity arrangement
Equity arrangement with recurrent entity
Minority share
Equal share
Equity arrangement with new entity
Majority share
Description
Agreement based on formalized
alliance contract.*
Firm has less than
50% equity share.

Firms both have
50% equity share.

Firm has more than
50% equity share.

Founding of new organizational
entity; joint venture.

Advantages
Limited integration, keep own
identity, focus on activities,
fexibility, easy exit.

Less risk, less
organizational
change and impact,
less need for alliance
management.

Sharing cost and
risks equally, equal
commitment and
interests.

More control, push
own interests, fewer
debates.

Transparent cost and proft
sharing, risk sharing, ownership
provides control and monitoring,
long-term incentives, fewer
reputational effects.

Disadvantages
Lack of control, requires alliance
management skills, risk of
opportunism, good preparation
and negotiation needed, less
learning and synergetic benefts.

Less proft, less
control, more
lobbying, risk of
opportunism.

Complex control,
agreement needed
at all decision points,
loss of speed.

Large responsibility,
high investments.

Diffculties with integration,
transfer of staff, required set-up
time, costs and legal implications
to exit or amend joint venture.

Alliance design
Note: * Franchise and (cross-)licence agreements tend to be more transactional-oriented than non-equity-based alliances and are, therefore, not incorporated in this table.
Sources: Dwyer et al. (1987); Hennart (1988); Pisano (1989).

61
62
Alliance design
Non-equity arrangements enable frms to realize their objectives without resorting to full
integration, such that they resemble market transactions and focus on short-term outcomes.
In contrast, the degree of integration in equity-based arrangements is relatively higher, which
creates stronger incentives for long-term commitments, akin to a hierarchical arrangement.
Without additional measures (e.g. contractual, control mechanisms), a non-equity arrangement offers limited safeguards against exploitation and opportunistic conduct, whereas an
equity arrangement provides substantial protection—though the costs associated with forging
and monitoring such an equity arrangement may outweigh its benefts. Thus, both governance forms offer unique advantages, and both entail limitations.The choice of a governance
form depends on the risks and level of infuence a frm prefers over its alliance activities.

Governance form selection
Alliance literature draws on several theoretical perspectives to provide rationales for governance form decisions.These perspectives are similar to those in Chapter 2; for parsimony, we
do not repeat an in-depth discussion of these theories here but rather cite key implications
for governance form decisions.
Transaction cost economics (TCE) notes that transaction costs are minimized when a governance form matches the exchange conditions (Williamson 1975, 1991). In general, when
a transaction involves mixed asset specifcity and is recurrent, an alliance is appropriate. Different governance form preferences thus represent responses to appropriation concerns: frms
resort to equity arrangements to reduce transaction costs when there is a risk of opportunism
but not to mandate hierarchical internalization. Equity participation is a feasible countermeasure to opportunism and appropriation concerns because opportunism by the equity
partner invokes penalties in the form of the reduced value of its equity stake. In addition,
asset specifcity provides an important indicator of structural preference. As frms make more
specialized investments, they tend to prefer equity-based arrangements, which offer protection against the exploitation of a hold-up situation. Furthermore, when creation, transfer and
exploitation of knowledge are part of the alliance, an equity arrangement is preferable because
this type of joint ownership aligns partner interests and provides superior monitoring (Gulati
and Singh 1998). Empirical studies generally provide support for these predictions (Osborn
and Baughn 1990; Oxley 1997; Pisano 1989).
The resource-based view (RBV) emphasizes value maximization through pooling and
employing valuable resources (Zajac and Olsen 1993).The resources exchanged are intimately
connected with alliance performance and can determine the preferred type of alliances and
chosen governance structure.The focus thus shifts from safeguarding against exchange hazards
to improving knowledge fows between partner frms. In distinguishing between proprietary
and knowledge-based resources (Das and Teng 2000b), a frm prefers a governance form that
enables it to procure external resources without losing control over its own resources. Propertybased resources are protected by property rights laws; non-equity arrangements often provide
enough security for collaboration. If the exchange entails knowledge-based resources, they are
less identifable and more diffcult to manage, so direct control through an equity alliance is preferable over non-equity agreements. Mellewigt and Das (2010) examine structural preferences
in the German telecommunications industry and fnd that the exchange of knowledge-based
resources tends to lead to equity agreements that safeguard against opportunism and knowledge
leakage. Finally, if resource contributions become heterogeneous, the risk of unwanted resource
transfers increases, a threat that can be countered by equity arrangements (Sampson 2004a).

Alliance design
63
The resource dependence perspective (RDP), concerned with a frm’s external arrangements, suggests that partner frms contribute critical resources to ensure their survival (Pfeffer
and Salancik 1978). When resources are not readily or suffciently available through market
exchange, frms engage in boundary-spanning activities and forge relationships with other
parties in order to obtain them and reduce external uncertainty. Non-equity-based arrangements provide more fexibility and the options to scale up or scale down an investment;
equity-based arrangements offer more control over joint resources. Flexible arrangements
mean that the frm can take advantage of changed circumstances, though at the cost of the
extent of its capability to exploit opportunities.The more interdependent the frms are, perhaps due to their interdependencies in purchases and sales, the more likely they are to prefer
an equity arrangement (Pfeffer and Nowak 1976).As the importance of the alliance increases
(i.e. fewer alternatives become available), frms tend to prefer equity arrangements in order to
gain more control (Blodgett 1991a).
Social network theory (SNT) states that the social context emerging from prior alliances
infuences governance decisions (Gulati 1995b). Repeated collaborations with the same partners provide information that helps frms learn about new opportunities and enhances their
trust in current and potential partners. Indirect relationships through common partners function as important referral mechanisms. Successive alliances reduce behavioural uncertainty
and the need for more sophisticated governance forms.Trust and the development of interorganizational routines also increase the predictability of partner frms’ behaviour, which
reduces the need for equity-based protection.That is, prior ties between partners reduce contracting costs and require less complex contracts; moreover, if the prior collaborations were
preceded by extensive negotiations, those prior agreements can usually be embodied in new
contracts at little cost. Gulati (1995a) reaffrms these claims: his study suggests that repeated
alliances are less likely than other alliances to be organized using equity.
An organizational learning perspective (OLP) states that frms enter into partnerships to
learn new skills or acquire tacit knowledge (Kogut 1988). The primary motive for forming
alliances is that superior knowledge enhances their competitive position. In terms of governance forms, OLP suggests that equity-based arrangements are more appropriate as learning
vehicles than are non-equity arrangements. If alliances involve knowledge, it can be diffcult
to circumscribe, monitor and codify this resource rather than giving rise to free riding or
misappropriation. Such concerns are compounded because knowledge is so diffcult to value
without complete information. A frm that wants to learn a particular skill thus stands a better chance of realizing this objective if it forms an equity-based arrangement, which is better
equipped to handle the knowledge management processes required for knowledge creation,
transfer and exploitation (Inkpen 2000). In addition, reciprocal relationships typical of equity
arrangements offer better protection against knowledge spillovers.
Institutional theory (IT) argues that alliances aim for legitimacy and social approval rather
than effectiveness or effciency. Common alliance practices emerge when collaborating becomes
an accepted phenomenon, and frms copy their rivals in their use of this strategy (Venkatraman
et al. 1994). In addition, entering strategic alliances increases legitimacy because partnering
with well-known and reputed partners improves the focal frm’s reputation and congruence
with prevailing norms in the institutional environment (Lin et al. 2009).The choice of nonequity or equity-based arrangements thus may be shaped by institutional pressures.
This concise overview of theoretical perspectives on governance form decisions summarizes the many unique insights into motives that range from economic to behavioural.Yet
choosing a governance form remains relatively straightforward. A simple non-equity-based
64
Alliance design
arrangement may suffce if the resources and information to be transferred are precise and
highly explicit. As the alliance becomes more complex and the likelihood of exchange hazards increases, equity-based arrangements tend to be more appropriate. However, governance
form is not the only decision to make when structuring an alliance. Alliance managers have
considerable fexibility in designating duties and responsibilities through alliance contracts
and management control mechanisms.

Alliance contracts
An alliance contract provides a legally binding, institutional framework that codifes each
party’s rights, duties and responsibilities and specifes the goals, policies and strategies that
underlie the anticipated cooperation (Luo 2002; Mayer and Argyres 2004).These promises or
obligations to perform particular actions in the future explain the contribution of an alliance
contract to alliance development and outcomes.That is, an alliance contract safeguards investments and property against misappropriation by a partner and codifes the penalties a frm
can impose on a counterpart if the latter violates the alliance agreement.An alliance contract
also provides a clear overview of the tasks and responsibilities of each party, such that it also
functions as a coordination mechanism. In order to cope with additional internal and external
challenges that may emerge unexpectedly as the partnership unfolds, alliance contracts can
enable adaptation.This so-called contingency adaptability refers to the specifcation of principles or guidelines that describe how to handle changing situations. Finally, an alliance contract
signals commitment as a tangible expression of trust and loyalty between partners.
The degree to which contractual terms actually appear in an alliance contract (see
Table 5.2) is often referred to as contractual completeness (Luo 2002), and it directly affects
alliance development and outcomes (Hagedoorn and Hesen 2007). Contractor and Reuer
(2014) present a continuum of alliance contracts, which comprises simple performance contracts on the one hand to complete equity-based joint venture contracts with side agreements
on the other. Simple performance contracts entail, for example, the exchange of intellectual
property rights, but other contractual terms could be left wide open, such that frms have
to interpret the content as relevant to the situation or renegotiate terms as necessary. At the
other end, in a complete and complex joint venture, multiple contract terms could be detailed
closely, leaving no room for interpretation.The more complex the contract is, the greater the
specifcation of promises, obligations and processes for dispute resolution. For example, complex contracts could specify procedures for monitoring, penalties for non-compliance, inputs
to be provided and outcomes to be delivered. As exchange hazards rise, so must contractual
safeguards to reduce the threat of costs and performance losses.
Contractor and Reuer (2014) suggest that contract completeness depends on dealspecifc, relational and environmental factors. Deal-specifc factors, among which include size
of fnancial and personal commitment, tacit knowledge, asset specifcity, interdependence and
risk of opportunism, induce more complex contracts. For example, if partners agree to make
alliance-specifc investments, complete contracts are needed to protect against opportunism.
That is, such investments need long-term alliances to provide benefts, so the potential for
threats of termination and unfavourable conditions imposed by non-investing counterparts
usually demand contractual safeguarding.The perceived risk of opportunistic behaviour is also
likely to determine contract completeness because the partners seek to reduce behavioural
uncertainty. Performance measurement ambiguity and alliance uncertainty also necessitate
Alliance design
65
TABLE 5.2 Contractual clauses
• The spirit of the venture or social contract
should be embodied in the alliance contract.
The parties might agree to the same terms on
paper but have different expectations about
how the agreement will work in practice.
• Technically, a business plan is not a legal
document, and it is not expected that
disagreements result in legal claims. It is
important however to document common and
individual alliance objectives.
• Scope and exclusivity refer to the delineation of
alliance activities in terms of product, country,
technology and period.
• The governance form should be specifed in
the alliance contract: non-equity or equity. It is
important to specify ownership (if applicable).
The partners may decide to equally share
ownership in a joint venture. Alternatively,
partners may take a majority or minority
equity stake.
• Contributions should be specifed: what
each partner supplies to the alliance in
terms of assets, business, services, technology
and people.
• Funding should be specifed: is initial capital
provided in cash or non-cash assets, what are
future legal obligations and does the alliance
require outside fnancing?
• Compensation mechanisms depict the rewards
parties can expect, such as profts, royalties,
dividends or intellectual property.A hybrid
compensation structure is preferred because it
provides short- and long-term incentives.
• The alliance’s management structure is usually
formalized in an alliance contract. Issues include
the right to appoint directors and delegates
in the management team, authority given to
managers from partners and reserved matters.
• Roles, tasks and authority specify who has
the right to make decisions in which areas,
and the decision-making procedures, such as
majority voting, consensus, consent, blocking
votes, lead partner ruling, based on proportion
of investment and a ‘one person, one vote’
principle.
• Protection, such as of intellectual property
rights (i.e. patents and licences), enables
frms to prevent partners from using certain
organizational resources in a competitive
manner.

• With non-compete and exclusivity clauses,
partners can limit their cooperation
(or the results of their cooperation) to
certain products, markets, technologies or
geographical areas.
• Adaptation and contingency clauses
provide guidelines and solutions about how
partners should act when confronted with
unanticipated circumstances.They may be
incorporated in the contract as independent
terms or as related clauses in specifc areas.
• Exit provisions detail the consequences and
obligations of parties when one or both
partners want to exit the alliance.They detail
implications tied to unilateral termination,
such as the right to sell to a third party, put/
call options in a joint venture, preemption
rights and obligations. Exit provisions also
may detail exit triggers, such as insolvency,
change of control and contract breaches. In
joint ventures, different resolutions to buyouts can be incorporated, including right of
frst refusal, right of frst offer, drag along or
a shoot-out procedure.
• Confict resolution provisions provide
guidelines.The most effective confict
resolution strategy is joint problem solving,
but procedures may also entail third-party
arbitration and votes.
• An alliance’s communication structure
is often specifed because high-quality
communication is critical to effective
functioning. It might list different fxed
contact points across different levels,
boundary-spanning agents, frequency of
meetings and the ICT infrastructure.
• Location of operation is often specifed.
Activities may take place at different
locations; to reduce the risk of hazards,
partners need to specify the working
procedures.
• Other contractual clauses may pertain to
setting the accounting principles to be
adopted by the alliance (e.g. international
joint venture); the governing law if partners
operate in different countries; timing issues
related to third-party consent (e.g. antitrust,
shareholder approval); major contracts with
existing customers and suppliers; employees
and taxes.

66
Alliance design
contractual protections because in these conditions, partners have incentives to limit their
contributions. In contrast, relational aspects, such as relational quality, prior experiences and
past ties, may reduce the need for more complete contracts.This is because mutual trust may
substitute for formal governance (see Chapter 6 for more detail on the relationship between
formal and relational governance). Environmental factors, such as the intensity of competition, the level of technological and market uncertainty, political risks, appropriability regimes
and legal enforceability, industry norms and reputation, also affect contract completeness.
For example, when compared to emerging countries with less-developed legal systems, legal
systems in developed countries function to enforce intellectual property rights, thus reducing the need for complete contracts. However, because crafting complete contracts is costly,
partners do so only when the risk of contractual breaches is high.Whereas contract completeness deters behaviours that could jeopardize the performance of an alliance, it increases contracting costs and potentially damages initial trust building. Contract completeness may thus
enhance alliance performance (Poppo and Zenger 2002), but this effect really is conditional
on the degree of cooperation between partners, such that when contracts are more complete,
cooperation contributes more to performance (Luo 2002). Moreover, if enforcement is diffcult, as in highly volatile environments, the costs of complete contracts may not outweigh
their benefts.
Contract standardization implies instead the application of similar contracts or terms
across a range of contractual transactions (Vlaar 2006). On a continuum, a tailored contract
would represent one end, whereas the standardized contract would be the other. A tailored
contract is designed especially for the alliance and tends to be fairly complex; a standard contract is intended to apply to multiple contractual relationships, so its terms are not
designed for any specifc collaboration (Ariño and Reuer 2004). Standardized contracts can
be quickly and effciently implemented; tailored contracts can be designed according to the
specifc situation, although doing so demands signifcantly higher costs. The applicability
of standardized contracts also depends on the variation in alliance schemes. Low variation
supports opportunities for using standardized documents; high variation makes tailored contracts seem more appropriate. Poppo and Zenger (2002) thus fnd that frms using customized contracts can improve their alliance performance, but only if a high level of relational
governance exists.
Another important distinction separates pre-specifed and open-ended alliances (Reuer
and Ariño 2007).When an alliance’s time horizon is pre-specifed, alliance managers tend to
be more concerned about ownership of proprietary knowledge, disclosure of confdential
information or the means for ending the alliance. The risk of opportunistic behaviours is
higher in alliances with a pre-specifed duration because the counterparts have few possibilities to reciprocate for opportunistic behaviour. Yet the costs of predicting future economic conditions for open-ended alliances and crafting appropriate contractual provisions
are signifcant, forcing alliance managers to rely more on incomplete contracts. In openended alliances of long anticipated duration, the thought of future benefts safeguards against
opportunism because the ‘shadow of the future’ shifts dispositions towards win–win instead of
win–lose perspectives (Heide and Miner 1992).
A well-designed alliance contract is thus consistent with the alliance objectives and the
partners’ interests, whatever those may be. Even if alliance partners have a clear understanding,
however, designing an alliance contract that anticipates all possible unforeseen circumstances
is simply not feasible. Alliances tend to be even more common in uncertain environments
because they offer frms fexibility. Alliance managers therefore need to balance the costs
Alliance design
67
of negotiating, monitoring and enforcing alliance contracts against the threat of potential
exchange hazards.They are likely to be left with the use of incomplete contracts, with their
adaptation problems and room for opportunistic conduct. In this case, the governance form
and alliance contract may need to be supplemented with additional management control
mechanisms.

Management control
Management control in alliances refers to control mechanisms that alliance partners might
use but are not likely to formalize in an alliance contract.Their primary purpose is to encourage coordination and ensure the partners achieve their predetermined objectives (Dekker
2004). Control mechanisms organize the coordination of interdependent tasks; frms might
put command and authority systems in place to force their partner to comply with the tasks
required to achieve alliance objectives or allocate resources even if the partner is unwilling to
do so. Management control also enables a frm to acquire infuence over alliance development
and outcomes by installing incentive systems, standard operating procedures and confict resolution procedures, which provide incentives to collaborate. Reducing appropriation concerns
and fulflling coordination requirements are thus critical rationales for management control.
Management control may also be embodied in alliance contracts, but it extends beyond governance form; for example, control is not a strict consequence of ownership (e.g. joint venture) but rather results from a variety of control mechanisms.

Control modes
We begin by differentiating three control modes (Dekker 2004): output, behavioural and
social. Output and behavioural control are based on formal control mechanisms, often but
not necessarily incorporated into an alliance contract (Chen et al. 2009; Patzelt and Shepherd
2008). The former specify the objectives to be realized by the alliance and its partners, and
then monitor the realization of such targets. For example, outcome controls might set alliance
objectives, create incentive and reward systems and outline monitoring procedures, which
together clarify mutual expectations and increase goal congruence. Behavioural control refers
to how the partners should act and monitors whether their actual behaviours comply with
these predetermined behaviours. Reports, meetings, planning, operating rules and routines,
standard procedures and confict resolution procedures are typical examples. Social control
mechanisms are not formalized in an alliance contract but rather refect relational norms that
guide partner frms’ behaviours and result from socialization processes (MacNeil 1978). Social
control thus infuences alliance activities through partner interactions that facilitate shared
values and common understanding. It requires signifcant communication through organizational mechanisms such as rituals, ceremonies, teams, task forces and other socialization
methods.The choice of output, behavioural or social modes of management control depends
on three factors:
1
If the resources contributed to the alliance relate closely to the partner frms’ core competences, the risk of misuse creates a serious threat. Firms can reduce this threat with
output and behavioural controls; for example, alliance contract clauses might specify
restrictions on the use of resources and establish monitoring procedures that increase
detection of misuse and thus help alliance partners legally protect their contributions.

68
Alliance design
2
Alliance activities often range from achieving economies of scale to developing new
concepts; the nature of these activities affects management control decisions. In alliances
with clear task specialization, focused management control is desirable, preferably accompanied by dedicated output and behavioural controls.
When measurability of outputs is ambiguous, social control enables frms to protect
themselves against misappropriation because relational norms and capital encourage
partners to act in the interest of their counterparts. If uncertainty and ambiguity surround resource contributions and outcomes are diffcult to measure, social control again
is most appropriate because it reduces the risk of exchange hazards.

3
Control dimensions
Geringer and Hebert (1989) also identify three dimensions of management control: the mechanisms alliance partners use to exercise control, the degree of control realized by the partners and
the focus of the control.The mechanisms that partners use to exercise control can vary, including
power, authority or a wide range of bureaucratic, cultural and informal mechanisms. For example,
Schaan (1983) suggests two main categories of control mechanisms: positive and negative. Positive control refers to mechanisms that frms employ to promote constructive behaviours, often
exercised through informal mechanisms such as staffng, participation in the planning process and
reporting relationships. Negative control, which relies principally on formal agreements, helps
frms stop or prevent alliance partners from implementing destructive activities or decisions. In
addition, Caniëls and Gelderman (2010) suggest that frms may employ administrative controls
to infuence decision making, enforced through contractual provisions that stipulate how to handle conficts, the specifc penalties for opportunistic behaviour and which behaviours are allowed.
Bargaining power may also function as a control mechanism: a dependent partner has a strong
incentive to continue the relationship, to avoid the various costs of termination, and it also avoids
opportunistic behaviour for fear of retaliation by the dominant partner.Anderson and colleagues
(2015) present three frameworks for management control.The frst framework focuses on how
control can be achieved through shared beliefs, diagnosis and interactions (i.e. behavioural); a
second framework emphasizes the object of control, including personnel, actions and results (i.e.
economic); whereas a third framework focuses on accounting and governance tools of control
(i.e. transaction effciency), such as decision rights, rewards, sanctions and performance. Empirical
results suggest that alliances that have value-creation as the root use combinations of transaction,
economic and behavioural control. All these types of control grant alliance partners infuence
over alliance activities, while also protecting them from opportunistic behaviours.
Next, the degree of control refers to partners’ decision-making authority (Killing 1983).
One partner may obtain a dominant decision-making role, perhaps through dominance in
board representation, the right to veto decisions, representation in alliance management, departmentalization of activities, planning and budgeting mechanisms or performance evaluations
(Makhija and Ganesh 1997). When a frm has dominant control, it can manage the alliance
more easily and, for example, direct resource allocations better (Child 2002). However, partners
may also share management control and play active and equal roles in making decisions. Shared
control provides partners with signals of long-term commitment, eases information exchange
and enables them to deal fexibly with unforeseen circumstances, which should improve alliance
outcomes (Beamish 1993). In a joint venture setting, perhaps neither partner is involved in decision making because an independent joint venture manager enjoys decision-making autonomy.
Glaister et al. (2003) propose that joint venture autonomy enhances alliance performance, but
Alliance design
69
once performance deteriorates, parents become involved in decision making and operations.Yet
the overall empirical evidence on the required degree of decision-making authority is inconclusive: frms need to consider the alliance’s circumstances carefully and make an informed
decision about the degree of control they desire. Moreover, control designs in alliances may
evolve over time, for example, from shared to autonomous types (Zhang and Li 2001).
The focus dimension of management control suggests that partner frms may seek to
obtain control over specifc alliance activities rather than control overall. Focusing management control in areas where its resources get utilized improves the frm’s ability to detect
misuse and free riding. Prior alliance studies thus distinguish strategic and operational control (Yan and Gray 2001); having a majority equity share tends to result in strategic control,
whereas providing non-capital resources leads to operational control (Child and Yan 1999). In
addition,Yan and Gray (2001) fnd that operational control positively infuences the realization of the partner’s objectives, but strategic control has no impact.Whereas ownership and
overall control might provide general insights in alliance progress, focused control appears to
enable frms to monitor critical alliance activities more closely.
In summary, governance form constitutes the foundation of an alliance design, but nonequity and equity arrangements also can be augmented with alliance contracts and management control mechanisms. Alliance contracts depict formalized agreements between alliance
partners and detail partners’ promises and obligations. However, not all design decisions can
or should be formalized, in which case additional management control mechanisms, such as
social and focused control, may be used to develop a coherent alliance design.

Structural confguration
Despite even their best efforts to deal with complexity and unpredictability, managers remain
limited in their ability to plan for the future and predict the various contingencies that may arise,
which creates the need for contracting and formalization. However, limited information may
also result in misaligned governance forms or incomplete contracts because it is too costly for
managers to negotiate and write claims that fully describe each party’s responsibilities and rights
for all contingencies that could reasonably occur during the alliance.When new circumstances
arise, a contract must specify, in its adaptation clauses, how to deal with them; otherwise, the parties will need to engage in costly renegotiations or terminate the alliance prematurely.Accordingly, alliance partners need a balance across governance form, alliance contract and management
control to minimize the costs of negotiating, contracting and monitoring, while still providing
suffcient coordination and protection against exchange hazards (Das and Rahman 2001).
We suggest that frms can design an optimal structural confguration (see Box 5.2) with a
constellation of mutually supportive structural safeguards, including governance form, contractual provisions and management control mechanisms. Equity arrangements outperform
non-equity arrangements with respect to reducing the likelihood of exchange hazards, but decisions about contractual design and management control also affect the likelihood of exchange
hazards. Alliance partners may agree about hybrid compensation structures, share decisionmaking rights or commit themselves to non-recoverable investments, which in combination
create reciprocal relationships akin to hierarchical control, though without resorting to equitybased arrangements. Furthermore, they may install management control mechanisms, such as
shared decision making, monitoring and mimicking hierarchical elements.This type of quasihierarchical control reduces parties’ vulnerability to exchange hazards and enables them to
protect individual interests, potentially rendering an equity governance form redundant.

70
Alliance design
BOX 5.2 ALLIANCE MIRROR DESIGN
A widely adopted alliance design is the mirror structure design, also known as the
multiple points of contact model, which aligns governance form, alliance contract and
management control. In a mirror structure, the partner frms mirror each other, such
that at each organizational level, representatives are appointed to participate in the
alliance management. The resultant structure covers strategic, tactical and operational
levels of the organizations. The strategic direction of the alliance is managed by executives from all participating organizations, who form an executive board (with crossboard positions) or oversight committee. Their primary role is to provide the strategic
direction for the alliance and guard its ft with the strategic targets of their organization. Involvement in the day-to-day practices of the alliance is generally low. In addition, an alliance steering committee is installed and, depending on the size and scope
of the alliance, it might consist of a strategic and an operational management team.
The strategic management team focuses on translating the strategic direction provided
by the executive board into plans and priorities. Often members of the management
team conduct periodic meetings to discuss the operational direction of the alliance and
resolve issues. If the management team cannot resolve issues or conficts, the matter
goes to the executive board, which makes the fnal decision. On a day-to-day basis,
the alliance is managed by representatives from the participating organizations who are
directly involved with its activities. Sometimes specifc groups work on specifc assignments or projects. The operational management team then acts as a steering committee
for working groups. One key advantage of the mirror structure is that alliance partners
can use it for both equity- and non-equity-based arrangements.
Partner A
Partner B
Corporate
level
Executive board
Alliance
function
Alliance
function
Alliance steering committee
Working groups
Operations
Financial
……..
……..

FIGURE 5.1
Alliance mirror design
Source: De Man (2013).

Corporate
level
Alliance design
71
Child (2002) reaffrms this view by revealing various successful structural confgurations
within the context of international joint ventures. Joint ventures with a majority foreign
equity share that receive heavy support from the foreign parent and give local managers an
active role outperform similar joint ventures with minimal local manager contribution. Joint
ventures with equal equity stakes tend to perform well when they also feature shared management and aligned goals; joint ventures with a minority equity share experience higher
performance when the foreign partner has operational control. In summary, designing alliances requires managers to resolve a series of trade-offs rather than seeking a single, ultimate
alliance design.

Alliance design: decision-making steps
In the preceding chapter, we focused on alliance negotiations and processes resulting in
alliance outcomes. In the alliance design stage, frms formalize these outcomes. Consistent
with win–win negotiations, a defnitive formalized alliance design enables partners to realize common objectives, while also protecting individual interests. The focus is on designing an alliance structure with a governance form, contractual provisions and management
control that aligns partners’ objectives and offers a constructive foundation for executing
the alliance. But what should be formalized in an alliance design, how and for what reasons?
To resolve these questions, we propose a (repetitive) sequence of fve decision-making steps
(see Figure 5.2).

1
Negotiate and
document
2
Design organization and
governance form
3
Formulate contractual
provisions
Alliance negotiation and alliance design are executed concurrently; preceding
the definitive alliance contract, partners may create a letter of intent and
confidentially agreement and document the results of their due diligence.
Develop organizational structure and reapply an extended governance mode
selection framework to decide to adopt a non-equity or equity-based governance
form (see Chapter 2).
Alliance-specific investments, proprietary knowledge, resource
complementarity and dependence favor an equity arrangement; contingent on
history and contract provisions a non–equity-arrangement may be more suited .
Design an alliance contract that incorporates all relevant provisions but at least
embodies clauses relating to coordination, contributions and compensation.
More complete contracts are preferred, but negotiation and monitoring costs
may not outweigh the benefits.

4
Develop
management control
Design of a management control system: decisions pertain to control modes,
control mechanisms, degree of control and control focus.
Excessive control in terms of monitoring may damage relational norms and
capital.

5
Evaluate
alliance design
Assess the efficacy of the chosen structural configuration; assess trade-offs
between governance form, contractual provisions and management control.
Design decisions are formalized in an alliance contract or Memorandum of
Understanding, explicating the fundamental principles of the alliance.

FIGURE 5.2
Decision-making steps: alliance design
72
Alliance design
Step 1: negotiate and document
Alliance negotiation and alliance design are often executed concurrently. As the negotiation
progresses, negotiators draft documents that provide initial input, prior to the defnitive alliance agreement. Building on the pre-negotiation outcomes, the frst document is a confdentiality agreement that details the rules of engagement and regulates the information exchange
between partners.The next document to be drafted in the alliance design stage is the Heads
of Agreement. This brief document establishes the (commercial) fundamentals of the alliance. It is not a legal document but rather a road map that nurtures communication between
negotiation parties. The negotiators should discuss the terms of this document, including at
least the following issues:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Spirit of the alliance, including shared values and visions.
Fundamentals of the alliance, including alliance objectives, scope, location of operation
and exclusivity of negotiations.
Anticipated contributions and the partners’ provision of resources in terms of tangible
(e.g. fnancial) and intangible (e.g. know-how) assets.
Anticipated compensation, including reward mechanisms described in terms of royalties,
fees, lump-sum payments and dividends, as well as ownership and rights over technologies developed by the alliance, their use (e.g. licensing) and future developments.
Coordination and tentative ideas about governance form, contractual provisions and
management control mechanisms, including the management and communication
structure.
Public announcements that detail who will release a press release announcing the alliance
to inform external stakeholders and when this will be done; stock exchange regulations
that must be adhered to.
Other agreements, including product development, pricing, cost sharing of marketing
campaigns, marketing rights of products and technologies in case the partnership ends,
and legal, tax and fnancial matters.

Step 2: design organization and governance form
Before opting for a governance form, it is critical that the alliance partners design the organizational structure (Albers et al. 2016). Specifcally, they frst have to decide upon the hierarchical arrangement required to organize alliance activities. For example, the relationships
between an executive board, a steering committee and working groups needs to be determined, as well as decision-making authority. Second, the partners must decide which teams
are required to execute alliance tasks and how they interact. For example, if the objective is to
commoditize a new innovative product, activities between R&D, engineering and marketing
staff need to be organized and aligned.Third, as part of the alliance organization, partners must
establish and formalize linkages to their organizations.Appointing gatekeepers and boundaryspanning agents is imperative. Once, the organization has been set (i.e. a blueprint has been
made), the partner may decide upon the governance form.
An appropriate alliance governance form provides control and conditions—that is, a context for executing the alliance successfully.The guidelines for the proper governance form are
not straightforward. Negotiators must fnd the delicate balance across negotiation, contracting and monitoring costs to protect their interests and anticipated benefts. Furthermore,
Alliance design
73
governance form decisions should be aligned with decisions about contractual provisions
and management control mechanisms. To discuss some of these considerations, we simplify
matters by taking a one-sided perspective, such that we note non-equity arrangements are
preferred when a frm does the following:
•
•
•
•
•
Expects to make limited alliance-specifc investments; otherwise, an equity-based
arrangement is more appropriate because it offers better protection against exploitation.
Expects to supply primarily property-based rather than knowledge-based resources;
otherwise, an equity-based arrangement offers better protection against knowledge leaks.
Considers the alliance of moderate strategic importance; otherwise, an equity-based
arrangement better protects against the unwanted transfer of critical resources.
Expects that the degree of required learning is low; otherwise, an equity-based arrangement is benefcial by functioning as a learning vehicle.
Possesses a history of collaboration with this partner; otherwise, an equity-based arrangement is more appropriate because trust and inter-organizational routines have not yet
been developed.

In addition to the choice between non-equity and equity-based arrangements, various types
of equity-based arrangements might be chosen. For example, a joint venture is preferable if
the frm seeks to divest resources but wants to continue exploiting their value. Protection of
the market and the frm’s reputation may prompt frms to adopt a joint venture form or separate out risky investments.The choice of minority versus majority equity-based arrangements
depends on the importance of the relationship to the frm and its desire to possess ownership
and exercise infuence.

Step 3: formulate contractual provisions
A governance form alone is not suffcient to govern an alliance. Alliance partners can augment their selected governance form with contractual provisions, whose choice and content
can alter the initial governance form decision. That is, using negotiation about the content
of the specifc contractual provisions, a frm can acquire strategic and organizational control and decision-making authority, in which case the equity-based governance form may
become obsolete. Resource contributions vulnerable to exploitation also could be protected
with nonexclusive protection provisions. A reward system with ex-ante and residual sharing
would provide long-term incentives to partners to remain committed; however, an absence
of adequate contractual protection may suggest that equity governance is more appropriate
to safeguard the frm’s interests.The more complete an alliance contract is, the less need for
equity-based governance forms, as reinforced by a mutual history of collaboration. However,
at the least, the contractual provisions should include the following:
•
•
•
•
A business plan specifying the alliance’s common and individual objectives.
The governance form, whether non-equity or equity-based.
The alliance’s management structure in terms of board representations, decision-making
rights, veto decisions and the alliance steering committee.
Partners’ resource contributions, including both property-based and knowledge-based
resources.

74
Alliance design
•
Clauses specifying compensation mechanisms, such as royalties, dividends and lump sum
payments.
Non-compete and exclusivity clauses that specify target markets and the use of technologies.
Protection clauses, including intellectual property rights, patents and licences.
Confict resolution techniques, such as arbitration and mediation.
Exit clauses, including triggers of termination and termination trajectories.
Regulations for accounting principles and timing issues, contracts with existing customers and suppliers, employees and taxes.

•
•
•
•
•
Step 4: develop management control
Alliance partners might also supplement an alliance design with management control mechanisms that are not formalized in an alliance contract. It is important to recall the spirit of
collaboration when deciding on management control mechanisms. Control systems should
not be based on who has more or less control, but rather on the right persons or organization
to control a specifc area based on their abilities or experience, the possession of appropriate tools to exercise control and control of the moment. Ill-designed management control
systems may suggest the appearance of control, but in reality, they provide inaccurate information and tend to jeopardize the quality of the working relationship. Management control
might include the following:
•
•
•
•
Modes of management control: contingent on the alliance objectives and initial design
decisions, partner frms may use a combination of outcome, behavioural and social controls to monitor partners’ behaviour and alliance progress.
Mechanisms of management control: partners may use combinations of positive and
negative controls and employ administrative or power-based control.
Degree of management control: partners need to consider in which areas they require dominant control or whether shared management is more likely to foster alliance performance.
Focus of management control: partners may install focused control in critical areas that
appear vulnerable to misappropriation.

Depending on the management control system, frms should make an organizational chart
that depicts the different roles, functions and reporting directions for each frm. In addition,
they can specify meeting frequency and communication and reporting systems. If applicable,
alliance partners may also opt to explicate a code of conduct: how do the partners expect their
employees to behave? Such codes are becoming increasingly popular in cross-sector alliances
between proft and non-proft organizations (see Chapter 15).

Step 5: evaluate alliance design
Building on these preceding decisions, alliance partners should evaluate the defnitive alliance
design: does the alliance design provide suffcient incentives and enforcement for long-term
commitment, while protecting the partners’ individual interests? If so, these decisions should
be clearly documented in the alliance contract (or Memorandum of Understanding), which
guides its execution.As part of the evaluation, alliance partners should pay suffcient attention
to the alliance implementation plan. Launching an alliance without a carefully prepared plan
is like starting a business without a business plan.

Alliance design
75
Summary
We have provided an overview of three structural building blocks of alliance design: governance form, alliance contract and management control. Each block of alliance design functions
to align partners’ interests, enable coordination and reduce the risk of exchange hazards.
Rather than considering them as discrete one-off decisions, we present them as interrelated.
Governance form decisions affect the content of contractual provisions, and vice versa. Defciencies in an alliance contract may be overcome through management control mechanisms.
Alliance negotiators should account for these relationships when negotiating the alliance
design.To this end, we have provided a fve-step procedure for frms that may assist them in
alliance design decisions and prepare the partners to execute the alliance. However, alliance
design alone is insuffcient to secure coordination and protection against exchange hazards.
Alliance management and in particular relational governance also offers a critical coordination mechanism. Before detailing on alliance management, however, in the next chapter we
frst elaborate on the alliance launch stage.

CASE: ORGANOVO1
Organovo was founded in 2007 with the intention of commercializing organ printing technology developed by the University of Missouri—Columbia. In 2009, Organovo opened its
laboratory in San Diego and focused primarily on printing blood vessels. In 2012, Organovo
went public and started a partnership with Autodesk research to develop 3D bioprinting
software. In the following year, Organovo became involved in cancer research and received
a stock listing at the New York Stock Exchange. In 2014, Organovo released the exVive3D
Human Liver Tissue. The printed tissues remained stable and functional for more than 40
days and were made available for preclinical in vitro testing to provide predictive liver tissue–specifc toxicity marker assessment. Following these technological advances, Organovo
forged multiple partnerships.
In 2015, L’Oréal’s Technology Incubator announced a partnership with Organovo to
develop 3D bioprinted human skin tissue. L’Oréal S.A. is a French cosmetics company with
its headquarters in Clichy, France. Although L’Oréal started with hair colouring products,
after the Second World War, the company soon ventured into other felds of the beauty
industry. Currently L’Oréal offers more than 500 brands and several thousands of individual products in all sectors of the beauty business. L’Oréal aims to be an innovative frontrunner in the business. Therefore, the company has developed a technology incubator that
enables it to develop technologies and uncover disruptive innovations across industries
that have the potential to transform the beauty business. One focus area concerns products with skin applications. The availability of human skin is critical for L’Oréal to develop
its products. L’Oréal also offers skin to implant on the human body to replace damaged or
diseased skin tissue. The production of human skin is a costly and time-consuming activity.
L’Oréal tries to avoid animal testing and therefore farms human tissue using its research
laboratory in Lyon. L’Oréal produces approximately 100,000 skin samples annually, which
translates to roughly 5 m2 of skin per year. This is a complex procedure that requires donations from plastic surgery patients in France. To increase skin production and accelerate
skin production through increased automation, L’Oréal turned to Organovo and initiated
a research partnership. Specifcally, the partnership aims to develop 3D printed human
76
Alliance design
tissues, which can be used for product evaluation and other areas of advanced research.
Organovo will introduce its proprietary NovoGen Bioprinting Platform. This 3D printing
platform has been developed by Organovo and its partner Invetech to print human tissue.
The initial application of this platform was printing blood vessels and nerve conduit, but
Organovo has expressed that potentially any tissue or organ can be built. Together with
L’Oréal’s expertise in skin engineering, the two partners aim to develop a commercially
viable solution. The partnership design consists of three consecutive phases. During the
solution development stage, the partners deploy a stage gate design. At each stage gate,
the partners have the ability to end the collaboration. During this phase, a technological
and viable solution is developed. According to Organovo, the printing of human skin will
be roughly similar to that of printing liver samples. Although the actual printing is not very
different from ordinary 3D printing, the nourishment of the cells requires in-depth scientifc
knowledge. The technology developed will be thoroughly tested in the following phase.
Given the objective, L’Oréal seeks the ability to speed up the production of human skin.
This requires Organovo to further industrialize the technology to become economically viable. This is the focus of the second stage of the partnership. For both these phases, L’Oréal
will provide up-front funding. The third and fnal phase of the partnership consists of the
development of a viable business model. In this phase, L’Oréal and Organovo will create
a commercial supply agreement that will include customary licensing and royalty terms.
The agreement will provide L’Oréal with exclusive rights to the skin tissue that the two
companies develop. These rights will remain intact for the purposes of development, testing, manufacturing, evaluation and sale of non-prescription skincare products and nutraceutical supplements. Organovo will retain the rights to these tissue models for effcacy
testing of prescription drugs, toxicity tests and the development and testing of therapeutic
or surgically transplanted tissues. For Organovo, this partnership is the frst application of
the technology that the company created in the beauty industry. Through the technology,
Organovo can automate the creation of skin tissue while mimicking the form and function
of native tissues in the body.
After its founding, Organovo pushed an innovation agenda seeking to become a leader
in the 3D bioprinter space. As a result, it generated a broad set of patents that provide foundational claims in the bioprinting space. In order to broaden the impact of the technology
and serve the needs of researchers and users of bioprinting, Organovo seeks to make these
patents available for licensing. In 2022, Organovo and BICO forged a licensing agreement
on Bioprinting Patents. BICO (formerly CELLINK) was founded in 2016. As the leading bioconvergence company in the world, BICO aims to reduce organ shortage and speed up
drug development by providing accessible life science solutions that combine biology and
technology, fundamentally shifting the global healthcare industry. The agreement provides
BICO’s division CELLINK with possibilities to access Organovo’s bioprinting technologies,
which will further empower the company to continue to advance and expand its product
portfolio. Before coming to this agreement however, Organovo and BICO were engaged in
several legal disputes regarding (alleged) patent infringements. Under the new agreement,
all civil actions regarding potential infringement and intellectual property rights concerning validity of Organovo’s patents are dismissed and/or terminated. The partners also have
released each other from all previous claims, demands, liabilities and costs in favour of the
benefcial and sustainable solution created through this patent licence agreement. Instead
of spending resources on legal disputes, the new agreement will strengthen BICO’s offering
Alliance design
77
by obtaining access to new technologies, and BICO will have the freedom to operate globally with the strongest and most extensive bioprinting portfolio on the market. In the words
of Organovo Executive Chairman Keith Murphy:
Organovo celebrates the success of CELLINK’s bioprinting product lines in opening up
the horizons of 3D bioprinting to customers. We are proud to be a part of enabling
CELLINK and BICO to grow these products and we look forward with excitement to
their next generation of bioprinters.
The agreement will enable BICO to effectuate an innovative and ground-breaking commercial agenda, speed up development for their customers (e.g. new instruments) and
enhance its market position and share, resulting in improved proftability in the long run.

Questions
1
2
3
Why would L’Oréal and Organovo opt for a non-equity governance form, and which
supportive contractual clauses could be used to steer the alliance towards its objectives?
What control and coordination mechanisms are used (or should have been used) to
enforce relationship governance and deter opportunistic behaviour?
Comparing the Organovo–L’Oreal and Organovo–BICO partnerships, what alliance
design diferences exist, and why?

Note
1 Bico (2022); King (2015); Organovo (2015, 2022).

6
ALLIANCE LAUNCH
Bringing an alliance alive depends on a smooth transition from the alliance formation stage—
including partner selection, negotiation and design—to the alliance management stage. Academics and practitioners consider alliance launch critical to the long-term success of an
alliance. In practice, however, managers tend to underestimate the diffculties and adversities
surrounding the execution of an alliance arrangement. Alliance launches are often executed
with the idea of ‘we don’t have time for it’, ‘let’s focus on the key objective’ and ‘we will
address issues when we encounter them’.The desire to get to work is understandable, but a
failure to systematically prepare and organize an alliance launch—both internally and across
the alliance—will most likely result in operating ineffciencies, poor decision-making, escalating conficts and ultimately the destruction of the alliance.Too many deals have been thrown
over the fence from those who are responsible for alliance negotiation and design to those
responsible for managing the relationship. Alliance partners commonly think that an alliance
is up and running as soon as a kick-off meeting has taken place. However, a lot more work
needs to be done before an alliance can be steered towards its objectives. People need to be
brought up to speed, teams need to be established, operational plans need to be implemented,
resources need to be secured and partners need to invest in relational understanding and collaborative routines.The frst section of this chapter explores in detail the challenges associated
with alliance launch.The second section elaborates on drivers that contribute to a successful
startup of an alliance arrangement.The third section presents a framework to guide managerial decision-making. The chapter concludes with two sections that present a summary and
a case illustration.

Alliance launch objectives and challenges
In contrast to partner selection, negotiation, design, management and evaluation, few frms
consider alliance launch management to be a distinct stage.This is unfortunate because there
is strong evidence that systematically organizing alliance execution is essential to long-term
value creation (Bamford et al. 2004). The alliance launch stage depicts the bridge between
alliance formation, with its focus on deal-making, and alliance management, with a focus on
extracting the collaborative value.Therefore, the main responsibility of managers during the
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-6
Alliance launch
79
alliance launch is to organize the transition from ‘drawing board’ to ‘day-to-day’ operations.
Specifcally, launch managers need to simultaneously attain (at least) three objectives during
this stage: secure strategic alignment, erect a new organization and build collaborative and
meaningful relations (Bamford et al. 2004; Visioni et al. 2010).

Launch objectives
A frst critical objective during the alliance launch is to secure alignment between the alliance
strategy and partners’ (strategic) interests, ambitions and plans (Bamford et al. 2004). Although
the deal has been made and the contract has been signed, asymmetries in strategic interests
may become manifest during alliance execution, or interests may change. Many conficts
of interest surface only when the partners dig deep into operation details and start to run
the alliance. In order to build a solid foundation, launch managers need to reconcile these
adverse asymmetries and communicate the strategic intent to all involved in the relationship.
Furthermore, to incentivize partners and generate smooth collaborative processes, it is critical
to secure alignment between alliance strategy and partners, communication, administration
and decision-making systems. Misalignment between alliance strategy, individual interests and
reporting systems could lead to serious delays in the attainment of short- and long-term milestones.Without strategic alignment, the future of the alliance will be jeopardized even before
the relationship is effectuated.
A second critical objective for launch managers is the building of a new organization
(Bamford et al. 2004). Although alliance partners formally agreed on paper how the new
organization should look, it is the launch manager’s responsibility to create an operational
governance system that promotes shared decision making, provides protection and does not
stife entrepreneurship. Governance adversities during the startup can quickly escalate and
pave the way for a premature termination of the deal.The new organization should ft with
the alliance business plan and create an environment in which the personnel of each partner
are able to contribute to a high-performing alliance. Launch managers should become familiar with their partner’s preferences and design and implement structures that facilitate highquality decision making. They should appoint strong and motivational leaders who are able
to build and lead effective teams. As such, during the startup, the people involved can make
timely and quick decisions and create and participate in open and transparent dialogues, while
providing partner organizations with suffcient control. Overall, launch managers who build
effective and effcient alliance organizations obtain commitment from staff across partners
and hierarchies because they carefully leverage and manage interdependencies (such as capital,
materials, people and intellectual property) between alliance partners.
A third objective for launch managers pertains to building productive relations between
and across staff.Alliance success depends on relationship issues such as trust, chemistry, smooth
communications, clarity about roles and responsibilities and dealing with cultural differences
between partners. Relationship aspects are especially crucial in the early stages of an alliance,
which are fraught with uncertainty, ambiguity and the legacy of alliance negotiation. Cultural differences between partners could create tensions, mis-communication and confict
that disturb the development of the alliance. Therefore, cultural differences should be managed actively to secure commitment from the key staff in order to create compelling value
proposition for employees involved in the alliance.Working together quickly to solve alliance
problems and accomplish results that could not have achieved before will help build trust.
Moreover, personnel working in the alliance should learn about each other and each other’s
80
Alliance launch
organization. This can be achieved by stimulating and facilitating constructive communication and by reducing or preventing miscommunication. Creating collaborative behaviour and
routines enhances collective sense-making—the latter is critical to alliance success.

Launch impediments
The alliance launch stage comes with unique objectives, and if frms do not pay suffcient
attention, failure to achieve them can ruin the relationship and cause alliance failure (Bamford
et al. 2004). Although managerial perceptions and biases may impede alliance execution (see
Table 6.1), the failure to attain alliance launch objectives is primarily caused by underestimating the salience of two alliance launch impediments.
The frst impediment pertains to the diffculties surrounding the organization of hand-offs.
Within an alliance launch context, a hand-off represents the transfer of tangible and intangible knowledge between people involved during alliance formation and people responsible
for alliance management. For example, a hand-off takes place between the negotiation and
design team who,‘on paper’, assigned tasks and responsibilities to engineers and the alliance
TABLE 6.1 Alliance launch misconceptions
Misconception
Assumption
Worst practice
We don’t have
time for it.

Alliance leadership assumes
that speed is critical to alliance
success, as deal-making has
already taken too much time.

Fast startup of an alliance can be extremely
risky for partners.This approach is
characterized by imposing pressure on working
staff to work on and achieve long-term
objectives without considering the need to
develop collaborative routines, build relational
quality, and enhance decision-making.

We are able to
‘self-organize’.

Alliance leadership assumes
that those working on the
alliance are skilled, have
subject matter expertise and
experience such that they
can and will take the actions
needed to (over time) coalesce
into a collaborative valuecreating arrangement.

Relying on the ability to ‘self-organize’ may
undermine an alliance’s value potential.This
approach is often facilitated by a joint kickoff meeting without further planning and
support. Structures develop organically, unique
challenges are not addressed and alliance
leadership ends up revisiting decisions to
ensure alignment and develop the necessary
protocols.

We have a
collective
understanding.

Alliance leadership assumes
that all key personnel have
a complete and shared
understanding of the context
for and intent of the alliance.
This assumption often includes
a belief that the contract is a
description of the alliance.

Building an alliance on an alleged collective
understanding and sense-making will
create conficts and misperceptions and can
derail an alliance.This approach is often
characterized by infuential stakeholders who
lack sensitivity for external collaboration and
operational processes.Alliance success hinges
on the effciency and quality of day-to-day
interactions as much as (often more than) it
does on interactions between alliance managers
and formal governance meetings.

Alliance launch
81
managers who supervise these engineers on the day-to-day execution of their tasks. Analogous to a relay race, a good hand-off involves transferring the correct baton at the right
time with the right intent. If a hand-off is not smooth and technically precise, it can cause
disorganization, mistrust, reinforce ‘us-versus-them’ perceptions and delay the execution of
critical collaborative processes. In contrast, a well-organized hand-off will accelerate alliance
growth. In addition to providing insight in the alliance contract, the people involved in dealmaking should offer information about the context in which the contract was formulated,
the intentions and spirit of partners, an overview of people who were involved and the issues
that were discussed. Such knowledge is critical because it provides the management team
with an opportunity to develop the alliance further where the deal-making team left off,
rather than start with a blank slate.Thus, a good hand-off requires the right constellation of
staff and suffcient connections between them to allow for intensive communication. Strong
hand-offs across organizational boundaries and hierarchical levels improve the speed, energy
and spirit in the alliance, and organizing these hand-offs effectively is a challenge for alliance
launch managers.
The second impediment that can obfuscate an alliance launch is the inevitability of
staff changes as the alliance becomes operational. New staff are assigned to the alliance
(such as scientists, engineers, marketers) while initial deal-makers (such as negotiators,
lawyers and CEOs) withdraw—or at least take a more distal position—from the relationship (Kelly et al. 2002). The new people will often have not worked with each other
before, will not know each other and will not have participated in the process of forming
the alliance, and will therefore have limited background information about the ideas, the
expectations and decisions made in the process. They bring different assumptions, attitudes and expectations about the alliance, as well as private fears about their role.This may
cause resistance, communication issues, a break-down of sense-making, or, in a worst-case
scenario, new people with disparate interest may raise unwarranted challenges to the goal,
scope and intentions of the partners to collaborate. Perhaps more importantly, staff who
partake in alliance formation, who may have educated new people, will most likely have
been assigned different tasks or returned to their regular jobs. Thus, a systematic launch
involves an extended set of individuals who partake during the early and later stages of
alliance development and will interact in some way during the alliance launch.The challenge is to remove communication barriers, lingering suspicions about partner motives
and latent opposition in the partner companies. Preparing new staff to work within the
alliance context is a critical challenge that must be addressed in order to avoid a delay in
the development of the alliance.

Alliance launch attributes
A systematic process and insight in the drivers for alliance execution is necessary in order
to effectively deal with the challenges inherently tied to launching an alliance. By following
an organized process for launching new alliances, partners can build the types of working
relationships, detailed strategies and operating plans that enable them to capitalize on valuecreating opportunities. Regardless of whether alliance launch managers occupy permanent
and distinct positions within an organization, will remain involved as alliance managers, or
have been acting as deal-maker during alliance formation (Bamford et al. 2003), a successful
alliance launch depends on the interplay between a set of fve attributes (see Table 6.2).

82
Alliance launch
TABLE 6.2 Alliance launch attributes
Attribute
Description
Key Elements
If not, then . . .

Assemble
launch team
The launch team
is responsible for
articulating and
implementing the
alliance launch
strategy.

Generate favourable short-term
process and outcomes during
transition period.
Launch team starts planning
when partners explicate
intention to collaborate.
Balanced team with leader who
has earned respect and has interest
in the success of the alliance.

Launch managers
who operate solitarily
tend to make biased
decisions due to
emotional involvement.
Imbalanced teams with
over- and underrepresentation tend to
invoke favouritism.

Articulate
launch strategy
The launch strategy
entails a detailed and
interrelated set of
plans, activities and
short-term milestones
that combine to
create a foundation
for long-term value
creation.

Develop a 100-day roadmap to
be used as an implementation
framework and checklist.
Formulate operational plans,
unconstrained by one partner’s
ideas, practices and structures.
Plan and design implementation
activities, including kick-off
and follow-up meetings.

Activity misalignment
during alliance
execution creates loss
of value.
Not knowing who
should be involved for
what reason generates
coordination and
relational conficts.

Create launch
speed
Proactive planning
and immediate
execution following
contract signing
is essential for the
rapid development of
collaborative processes
and outcomes.

Launch planning begins
during negotiation and design
development stages.
Fast and clear decisions are key
for promoting stability and
creating energy in the alliance.
Small steps at the start create
confdence, build trust and
allow partners to learn.

Fear and indecision will
be an obstacle to rapid
decision-making and
proactiveness.
Procrastination in
launching invokes
performance and
relational risks.

Organize
communication
Active and timely
communication to
internal and external
stakeholders creates
commitment and
involvement.

Communication from alliance
leadership must be signifcant,
constant and consistent.
Clarity about the motive, scope
and intent should be conveyed
to management and operational
staff.
Proactive issue spotting through
dialogue eases operational and
functional collaboration.

Collective sensemaking processes tend
to break-down and
inhibit progress.
Support from
internal and external
stakeholders will
diminish.

Align
measurement
Create short-term
target and milestones
for all functional areas,
consistent with the
long-term alliance
strategy.

Provide a clear defnition of
short-term milestones, tailored
to the alliance context.
Establish a performance
monitoring system to track
alliance launch progress.
Acknowledge that performance
metrics change as the alliance
progresses towards maturity.

Without appropriate
launch metrics, alliance
leadership makes
erroneous decisions.
Escalation of conficts
and withdrawal of
commitment become
realistic threats.

Sources: Bamford et al. (2004); Kelly et al. (2002); Segil (1998).

Alliance launch
83
Assemble the alliance launch team
The (joint) alliance launch team is composed of staff who are employed by the partners involved
in the alliance. The team is typically established during alliance negotiation and design, but
internal preparations may extend before partner selection (that is, intent to collaborate). It
is preferable to establish a team because appointing a single alliance launch manager may be
ineffective. Personal preferences, favouritism and emotional attachments of a launch manager
may bias decision making and thus render an alliance unstable from the start.Team members
typically dedicate themselves full-time to the launch process, as alliance execution involves the
management of demanding, uncertain and sometimes conficting processes. In order to resolve
conficts and serve partners’ interests, team member representation is preferably balanced
between the partners.The team leader, who is ultimately responsible for the alliance launch,
will preferably be an ambitious, confdent and fully dedicated senior executive who disavows
all biases stemming from the leader’s own organization. The team’s main responsibility is to
formulate and implement the launch strategy, while considering the interests of all stakeholders.To this end, among other activities, the team will develop operational plans, set milestones,
contact champions in the partner organizations and obtain their support, identify potential
hand-off adversities and resolve partner misfts before they can undermine value creation
processes.The team sets the right tone for the alliance and manages the technical/operational
and relationship aspects during the transition period. In addition to being business savvy and
possessing corporate and business know-how, team members tend to have excellent interpersonal skills.Team members should be chosen based on their ability to work in cooperative and
uncertain environments.

Articulate the alliance launch strategy
The alliance launch strategy entails the formulation and implementation of an alliance
execution plan. It provides an answer to the question: what do partners need to do to
effectuate the alliance contract and get operations going? The launch team is responsible
for developing this ‘grand’ execution plan, which generally consists of a detailed 100-day
road map. For example, day 1 may refer to sending out a press release and day 100 may refer
to the formal withdrawal of the launch team. Operationalization of intent and plans—the
translation of the alliance contract and partners’ ambitions into an execution plan—is critical because successful launches depend on the quality and detail of operational planning.
Such plans—with clear functional goals, activities, results and milestones, for example—
secure commitment from key staff and create compelling value propositions for employees
to become involved in the alliance. An effective alliance launch strategy also identifes and
explicates (new) opportunities for value creation as the rapid achievement of intentional
and emergent milestones instils confdence among the partners that long-term alliance
objectives are also attainable. In writing these plans, decisions should follow a neutral,
objective decision-making process so that the solutions employed refect the interests of all
parties. It is also critical to set attainable short-term milestones as the attainment of these
will create trust, stimulate interaction and learning, and reinforce the spirit of the alliance.
As part of the launch strategy, planning its implementation is critical. As part of the execution plan, it makes sense to identify which employees (and other stakeholders) from which
partners require preparation and need to be involved during the launch.The launch team
is also responsible for orchestrating key launch activities (such as workshops and meetings)
84
Alliance launch
and translating and deepening the strategy (as formulated in the contract) along a series of
operational dimensions. In order to maintain neutrality and promote an alliance of equals,
it is important to act with an open mind and not be constrained by partner organization ideas, practices, structures and systems. Launch decisions should follow from neutral,
objective decision-making processes to, for example, ensure incentives to secure talent
and critical resources from each partner and to create an aligned and working governance
structure.To accomplish these tasks, it is critical that the launch team begins to prepare on
time, is involved in contractual negotiations, obtains commitment and legitimacy, and sets
milestones essential for alliance growth.

Create speed in launching the alliance
Anecdotal evidence suggests that alliances stumble during the frst 100–180 days, losing
critical time and momentum while failing to build an effective collaboration infrastructure
(Bamford et al. 2003). Therefore, a successful alliance launch implies careful preparation
and swift execution. Alliance launch planning precedes the formalization of the contractual agreement; once partners sign the contract, alliance execution is imminent. Starting
on time, with solid preparation, is essential for rapidly installing a collaborative process.
Formulating and executing launch plans prevents fear and indecisiveness from becoming an obstacle to alliance progress. Timely decisions are the key to promoting stability
and creating belief in and commitment to the alliance. Working together quickly to solve
problems and accomplish results that could not have been achieved before helps to build
trust. In order to maintain the speed, energy and spirit in the alliance, a smooth hand-off
between formation and management is crucial. If the timing and the speed is not in sync
between the people involved, it will immediately jeopardize progress. To maintain speed,
the launch team must identify and manage the hand-off situation. Despite the importance
of speed, beginning with small ‘baby steps’ is a prerequisite for creating confdence in one
another’s intentions, capabilities and contributions. Ultimately, the early completion of a
launch project can mitigate relational and performance risks and enable the early realization of alliance benefts.

Organize communication eforts
Communication is critical during the alliance launch. Alliance leadership must be signifcant, constant and consistent in the content, frequency and timing of communication.
With regard to content, employees and external stakeholders are informed, for example,
about alliance motives, scope and governance, and insights into why their organization
participates. As alliance execution progresses, launch managers should provide information frequently, for example, during launch meetings, workshops and bilateral encounters.
Over-communication depicts a driver of successful organizational alignment and integration. Launch managers should also offer updates about performance progress and milestone
achievement as such information is critical to maintain continuity commitment. Highquality communication promotes openness and trust and allows partners to quickly resolve
adversities that emerge once an alliance becomes operational. Openly discussing issues also
redirects partners’ attention to blind spots; thus, communication reduces unexpected surprises and helps to build confdence.

Alliance launch
85
Align launch measures with strategy
Building a set of aligned measures implies that the performance system in place fts with the
development stage of the alliance (Segil 1998). During alliance formation, metrics should
inform management about why the alliance is valuable; during the management stage, metrics should inform about the extent to which the alliance is attaining its objectives (see also
Box 8.1). During the launch stage, metrics focus on the extent to which alliance execution
progresses according to partners’ expectations. Target and milestones must capture all functional areas of the scope and focus particularly on the measurement of short-term alliance
outcomes and processes. Doing so requires clear defnitions and articulation of tailored milestones, which are aligned with the alliance strategy. It also demands an effective tracking system
to monitor progress and identify areas for improvement. During this stage, metrics primarily
capture aspects of relationship quality (such as harmony, trust and commitment), decisionmaking (quality, effectiveness and speed), governance (learning, fexibility and adaptability)
and initial alliance objectives (such as spending on research and development, and operating
effciency).The launch team is responsible for creating and implementing the launch metrics
and for communicating the results of performance assessments to relevant staff. Based on
systematic analysis, the launch team leader should present a consistent set of priorities, in collaboration with functional and operational managers, to accelerate alliance execution.

Alliance launch: decision-making steps
The main objective during the alliance launch stage is to accomplish an effective and effcient
transition from alliance formation to alliance management. To increase the likelihood of an
alliance attaining its long-term objectives, it is important that partners allocate suffcient time
and energy to transition processes and decision-making.Although the formal launch phase of
an alliance begins after the contract is signed, those who will drive the alliance launch need to
be engaged long before the ink is dry.This is because once the alliance becomes operational,
multiple hand-offs between and across hierarchical levels need to be organized simultaneously,
under dynamic conditions, as staff changes occur. In order to build a value-creating partnership,
management should focus on assembling a launch team, on strongly supporting the execution
of the alliance and on joint learning. To guide a successful alliance launch, we have distinguished fve steps that should inform decision making during alliance launch (see Figure 6.1).

Step 1: prepare alliance launch
During the launch preparation stage, partner frms individually prepare to launch the alliance
by assembling the alliance launch team and formulating a tentative launch strategy. To this
end, they gather all possible information about resource needs/gaps, essentials with regard to
internal communication, staffng possibilities and adversities that could potentially inhibit collaborative processes during alliance execution, including partner misfts, tensions developed
during negotiations and blind spots in the governance structure. This internal preparation
helps launch managers to immediately initiate launch activities once the deal-makers conclude their business, formalize an agreement and send a press release to external stakeholders
(such as journalists and investors). No later than this point, launch managers representing their
organizations should come together and combine their insights, discuss pitfalls and start developing plans to organize a smooth transition from formation to management.

86
Alliance launch
Pre-launch
(preparation)
1
Prepare
alliance launch
Day 1
(press
release)
Assemble internal launch team and gather all information generated
during the preceding alliance development stages.
Integrate partner launch teams, combine information and obtain and
manage executive support.

2
Develop alliance
launch strategy
Translate alliance strategy and alliance contract in detailed
operational/functional plans with clear (team) tasks, activities,
responsibilities and milestones.
Set up internal and external communication plans containing
information on alliance motives, scope and governance.

3
Execute alliance
launch strategy
Organize a joint kick-off meeting to share information and set the
stage for a collaborative working climate.
Implement operational plans; align decision making,
communication, and ICT; and install governance mechanisms.

4
Transition to alliance
management team
5
Evaluate and
document
Organize a joint transition meeting to share information and
formally transfer governance to alliance management.
Create skill building plan, conduct health check and sign off on
alliance launch deliverables.
Conduct a comprehensive assessment of alliance launch processes
and outcomes, including staff experiences.
Document results for future reference in case of an alliance relaunch
and to improve future alliance launches.

100+ days
(transition)
FIGURE 6.1
Decision-making steps: alliance launch
Assembling a joint alliance launch team makes it possible to identify and (preemptively)
resolve conficts that emerge once the alliance becomes operational.The alliance launch team
should have full access to all information gathered in preceding alliance development stages
(for example, strategy, partner selection, negotiation and design) and to information pertinent to the future of the alliance. For example, members of the launch team may participate
in exploratory conversations and even sit in on the negotiations. During these preliminary
stages, they play an advisory role rather than participating in deal-making. Nevertheless, they
may observe the proceedings and get to know key individuals. By the time the contract is
signed, the launch managers are ready and eager to take charge.The team generally consists
of experienced alliance managers who have strong connections in their organizations.Their
corporate know-how and know-what enables them to speed up decision making, assess the
impact of decisions on the functional areas and, in case of conficts, identify and contact staff
who can resolve problems.They also coordinate efforts with senior level support and input.
Implementing the right leadership structure to support a launch is an essential component of
ensuring alliance launch success.

Step 2: develop alliance launch strategy
The launch team is responsible for developing the launch strategy, which entails several
interrelated plans and activities.The team must develop a 100-day road map and provide an
account of tasks, activities, results and milestones that need to be executed and achieved during the frst phase of alliance execution. This road map contains detailed operational plans,
Alliance launch
87
an overview of launch metrics, solutions to overcome partner differences and an overview of
alliance launch activities. Specifcally, an implementation plan should include the following
topics:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Time span for achieving alliance objectives and performance metrics system.
Personnel plans to allocate the roles to key persons involved in the alliance; training and
education of personnel and personnel rotation programmes.
Resource plans to secure timely resource provisions after the alliance starts (e.g. funding,
patents, software systems).
Marketing plan to secure the integration of sales and service systems and joint distribution.
Operational plans to support operational linkages between the frms and enable the integration of business processes.
Communication plan to identify requirements for effective formal and informal communication during all stages of the alliance, including briefngs with operational managers
and reporting to executive managers.
Contingency plan that specifes responses when dealing with unforeseen circumstances,
such as product launches and market failure.

The launch team should also organize training and provide tools to assist staff in conducting
their tasks. For example, it is most helpful to participate in joint training so that partners share
common vocabulary, skills and even concrete job aids to enable collaboration. Joint training
also provides an opportunity for partners to get to know one another and build effective
relationships.This familiarity forms the basis for more constructive interactions and represents
an insurance policy against interpersonal and functional breakdowns. Furthermore, planning
often lacks involvement from the teams and individuals who will lead implementation, which
can breed misunderstanding and erode support. Good planning involves key staff early, and
successful alliances are based on a well-coordinated hand-off from design to management
through launch.

Step 3: execute alliance launch strategy
Well-designed alliance launch strategies must lead to action. In an alliance, this implies coordinated and collaborative action.As the frst step in execution, the launch team should organize
a kick-off meeting that involves the alliance core team. During this meeting, mutual expectations, ambitions, governance issues and other relevant topics are discussed. In other kick-off
meetings that also involve non-core staff, an overview of the structure and status should be
offered, governance committees and functional/operational teams installed and put to work,
work streams identifed and accountabilities given. Next, the alliance metrics must be implemented in order to monitor progression towards attaining the alliance objectives.This requires
setting up management systems, which might also imply the implementation of supporting
ICT infrastructure that enables the alliance management team to effectively govern the alliance.

Step 4: transition to alliance management team
After 100 days (or another agreed-upon period), alliance management is formally transferred
from the launch team to the managers responsible for the day-to-day management.Although
some launch team members may continue their work, other members are likely to be assigned
88
Alliance launch
to new alliances and/or tasks. In order to signal to internal stakeholders that the alliance is
entering into a new stage, a post kick-off meeting needs to be organized. During this meeting, information is shared about the status of the alliance and next steps that will be taken.
The launch team creates a skill-building plan, conducts a fnal health check and approves
alliance launch deliverables. The transition to the alliance management team requires a specifc and carefully designed strategy. This requires the entire launch team to transfer their
collective responsibilities at a specifed moment in time when the alliance management team
will assume responsibility for managing the alliance.This ‘big bang’ transfer of responsibilities
ensures clarity about who is in control of the alliance relationship.
However, this approach involves some risks. A frst risk is that the new team is not fully
introduced in the alliance dynamics.This could jeopardize the collaboration within the team
and the functioning of the alliance as a whole. Next, a new team presents new team challenges. A new ‘social structure’ needs to be built, which may require time. An alternative to a
big bang approach is a phased approach in which positions are changed gradually over time.
This enables the new people to become accustomed to their new roles. However, it also poses
a risk of ambiguous responsibilities and tensions between old and new team members who
are either hesitant to let go or anxious to take control. In short, the transition from the launch
team to the management team requires consideration and a careful execution.

Step 5: evaluate and document
Learning from the alliance launch is critical because experiences may prevent future alliances
from premature termination.To this end, the launch team needs to conduct a comprehensive
assessment of alliance launch processes and outcomes, with a specifc focus on staff experiences.The results of alliance health-checks and other performance reports also depict critical
input for a systematic review of the alliance launch process.The results should be documented
for future reference and be used as input for other alliance relationships. However, the documents should also be available to alliance management taking over management tasks (see
Step 4) as it will enhance their understanding of prior decisions. In case of an alliance relaunch
(see Box 6.1), these documents may also be of critical importance as they should contain
detailed information on successes but also on tensions, adversities and conficts.

BOX 6.1 ALLIANCE RELAUNCH
No matter how well an alliance is launched, changes in circumstances may warrant a
relaunch of the alliance relationship. For example, changes in partners’ strategies and
organization, unforeseen competitor moves, new technologies and break-down in alliance performance and commitment may damage an alliance beyond normal repair.
In these circumstances, it is often easier to opt for a (radical) alliance relaunch than
to seek performance improvement through incremental change. However, the need
for a relaunch is sometimes less obvious. Although the alliance is strategically critical
to the partners, alliance outcomes and processes are slowly deteriorating. In order to
identify clues, partners need a systematic and comprehensive performance system to
Alliance launch
89
identify adversities indicative of an alliance relaunch. Metrics may focus on signs, such
as slow and dead-locked decision making, a substantial number of communication
errors, escalating operational conficts, employee attrition, high absentee rates during
critical meetings and implicit and/or explicit violations of agreements. Ideally, during
the initial launch of an alliance, some time would be spent discussing and defning triggers that would indicate the need for a relaunch and can be jointly monitored (whether
as part of the alliance scorecard or independently).
Sources: Eaves et al. (2003); Visioni et al. (2010).

Summary
In this chapter, we have pointed out why the startup phase is a crucial phase for the success
of the alliance.We have detailed the alliance launch objectives, challenges, barriers and drivers
and provided an overview of the managerial guidelines that enable frms to launch an alliance effectively and effciently. However, we have not suggested that a ‘one-size-fts-all’ solution to alliance launch exists. Launch managers need to formulate trade-offs and creatively
tailor the launch strategy and derived plans to the idiosyncrasies of the alliance. For example,
when comparing non-equity with joint venture arrangements, specifc launch activities may
deserve more weight. Within a non-equity arrangement, information systems and cultural
differences may need to be aligned, whereas in a newly established joint venture, new systems and cultures may need to be created. As joint ventures tend to be more complex with
regard to fnance, organization and legislation, the alliance launch teams responsible for their
execution would beneft from specialist members. Also, the formal transition of management
to alliance managers responsible for the day-to-day operations may involve more hand-offs
(functional and hierarchical, for example) than a non-equity arrangement. Other conditions
that may affect alliance launch activities include alliance objectives, partners’ backgrounds and
experience, and environmental dynamics.

CASE: CAPGEMINI–ENECO1
Capgemini is one of the world’s foremost providers of consulting, technology and outsourcing services. With 180,000 staff working in more than 40 countries, together with its
clients, Capgemini creates and delivers business, technology and digital solutions that ft
their needs, enabling them to achieve innovation and competitiveness. To enable future
growth and development, Capgemini developed the Utility to Energy Services (U2ES) transformation proposition. With U2ES, Capgemini aims to improve customer satisfaction and
build new customer and strategic relationships, enabling operational excellence and creating new business models and new revenue streams. Fuelled by the U2ES transformation
programme, in 2015, Capgemini signed an alliance partner agreement with Eneco Group
(Eneco, Stedin, Joulz, Ecofys), the leading Dutch sustainable energy group dedicated to
helping its clients to save, use, exchange or sell energy. The joint objective is to engage and
collaborate in business innovation and digital transformation, and accelerate innovation and
90
Alliance launch
new value creation for both partners. The agreement builds upon Capgemini’s worldwide
sector knowledge and best practices in digital utilities transformation and Eneco’s leadership
in energy services and new business models.
The agreement will also drive industry-wide innovation for utility organizations, as Eneco
and Capgemini plan to make a number of newly developed energy services available to
other industry players through Capgemini’s U2ES transformation programme, which is
helping utility companies transform into energy services companies. Driven by its mission
of sustainable energy for everyone, Eneco’s success will depend on its ability to innovate and
transform its current IT landscape and capabilities in order to reduce total cost of ownership
and create a launch platform for its future services. In the words of Joeri Kamp, CIO of Eneco
Group, ‘Our customers are changing the way they use energy in their homes and for their
businesses dramatically. Decentralized and renewable energy have become the standard.
Our focus is on facilitating this transformation with agile products and services’. Thus, the
collaboration enables partners to innovate by integrating IT solutions with knowledge of
sustainable energy and utilizing energy infrastructures. Specifcally, the alliance helps to
improve and transform Eneco’s IT landscape, as well as to create joint technology exploration, joint intellectual property (IP) and business development. Preliminary and early focus
areas will include home energy management, electric vehicle charging, local energy generation and digital customer services.
During their discussions and while shaping the alliance, the partners recognized that
making this alliance successful would require that they work together; therefore, they
entered the launch phase and determined what they needed to do to position themselves
for success. To organize the alliance launch, innovation directors and two to three other
executives from both partners combined to set the scene and create internal commitment
on a larger scale. It was considered vital to focus on an open and transparent relationship
with time to establish personal connections. A two-day workshop was chosen as the launch
event, with a focus on sharing opportunities and best practices, but also to make sure people would have time at the bar to build an eagerness to join forces. In other words, the
launch team defned the enablers of success.
In April 2015, this two-day workshop was held. Top-level executives and key specialists
from both partners came together to share and discuss ambitions, market views, challenges
and solutions, as well as spend time together to establish a cultural and personal click.
Bringing tangible experience and solutions to the table opened eyes on both sides and
quickly established credibility and eagerness to team up. This resulted in an extensive list of
areas for potential cooperation and joint value generation. For example, during this meeting
the launch team facilitated conversations aimed at clarifying ambiguous goals and drilling
down into a meaningful level of specifcity beneath such high-level objectives as ‘meet endcustomer needs’ and ‘create value’. They then helped both sides work together to develop
detailed operation plans to achieve their goals. Following this kick-off meeting, within a
matter of weeks the partners had a jointly agreed-upon operational plan that clearly defned
focus areas for the next 12 months.
With regard to governance, the partners decided that, to guarantee alliance progress, a
‘90-day partnership heart beat’ would be the preferred rhythm. Thus, immediately following the kick-off meeting, a series of quarterly steering committee meetings were organized.
During these initial meetings, an informal atmosphere was maintained to share how ongoing initiatives could be accelerated and how a ‘skin in the game’ attitude and approach
Alliance launch
91
could be established and supported. A small investment pool was created to allow initiatives to take quick steps forward. Also, the frst Dutch core team meeting was organized
within a year after signing. The core team is responsible for providing guidance and control
on a frequent and operational basis.
Several joint activities were organized in order to celebrate short-term success. For example, in June 2015, Capgemini and Eneco gave a joint presentation at the Capgemini Global
Analyst Day held in Paris. Also, senior executives from both partners went on trips to the
United States, visiting other utilities and potential partners and visiting Capgemini’s Applied
Innovation Exchange (AIE) in San Francisco. The AIE is a dedicated space to enable joint innovation between Capgemini and its clients and partners, and between clients and other companies. The AIE’s aim is to enable participants to attain a competitive advantage in today’s
fast-pace innovation market landscape by compressing the cycle time from the discovery to
deployment of innovation. The AIE in San Francisco provided a strong link to the US start-up
community and accelerated initiatives to bring start-up solutions to Eneco.
To systemically organize activities during the frst year, the partners decided to use
Capgemini’s project approach to generate and execute the project initiatives part of the
agreement. That is, a four-gate-based approach to secure project evaluation and prioritization was employed. The four gates pertain to project idea generation (Gate 0), project
proposal (Gate 1), project confrmed (Gate 2) and project execution (Gate 3). During the
alliance launch, the partners together decided on the portfolio of project initiatives to be
developed, based on business need and potential value. For each initiative, they completed
a review that contained information about the initiative’s impact on customer experience,
ambition, status, progress and which partner takes the lead. This approach enables the
partners, from the start, to have a comprehensive and jointly agreed project portfolio with
suffcient operational detail to guide day-to-day work.
Taken together, as a result of a systematic alliance launch, the frst year of the Capgemini–
Eneco alliance enabled the partners to celebrate successes and build a solid foundation.
They obtained a deeper understanding of one another’s organization (culturally and operationally) and installed a governance structure tailored to the new relationship with a clear
project organization. Capgemini and Eneco were able to collaborate effectively and effciently, even in the face of unexpected disagreements and conficts. The Capgemini–Eneco
relationship has become stronger over time, generating extant collaborative and innovation
opportunities within the realm of energy.

Questions
1
2
To what extent do you think that Capgemini’s alliance launch approach contributed to
alliance success? What more could they have done?
To monitor launch progress, what metrics would you suggest, and how would the
application of these metrics inform decision-making?

Note
1 Interview with senior executive of Capgemini.

7
ALLIANCE MANAGEMENT
The alliance management stage confronts alliance partners with the next challenge: monitor and
coordinate alliance activities, and if required impose changes, to the purpose of creating valuecreating conditions and mitigating the potential threat of exchange hazards. Alliance managers
must oversee whether the partners deploy their resource contributions, adhere to coordination
mechanisms,act on expressed commitments and execute and complete the tasks assigned to them.
The decisions made during the preceding alliance development stages,particularly alliance launch,
may ease the task of alliance management, but as the relationship progresses, the focus should be
on day-to-day coordination related to partners’ ability to align their contributions and efforts to
ensure effciency and effectiveness.This stage also introduces partners to new uncertainties and
ambiguities, emerging from both internal and external contingencies.An alliance manager’s task
is to respond to these contingencies and steer the relationship towards its objectives.To inform
their alliance management, managers need to recognize how to deploy a range of soft approaches
(shown in the frst section).The following two sections provide detail on the relationship between
alliance design and alliance management, and a systematic framework and decision-making steps
for alliance management.The chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

Alliance management approaches
Alliance management encompasses both organizational and inter-organizational routines, systems and procedures that make an alliance work (or not). Its objective is to optimize conditions to enable communication, confict resolution, decision making and evaluation, which in
turn foster alliance performance (Ireland et al. 2002).Yet an alliance’s value creation potential
is continuously at risk. Environmental conditions such as industry dynamics, regulations and
laws could pose a threat or provide an opportunity—for example, the industrial and political environment may render an alliance agreement obsolete, or competitors may introduce
new technologies that force alliance partners to reconsider their alliance contract. Changes
within the partners’ frms also create dynamics that demand active alliance management.
Internal reorganizations, corporate strategy shifts or transitions in the board of directors may
hinder alliance progress. Furthermore, causes endogenous to the alliance can prompt managerial action: the alliance’s performance might fall below initial expectations, the partners may
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-7
Alliance management
93
TABLE 7.1 Four alliance management approaches
Relational governance
Confict management
Response strategies
Inter-partner learning
Description
Social institutions
that govern and
guide alliance
partners to behave
in a mutually
benefcial manner.

Conficts are
inherently tied to
alliances and tend
to hinder alliance
collaboration and
outcomes.

Adversities require
managers to react
with relationshippreserving or
destroying response
strategies.

A regular and
repeatable pattern of
routines, supporting
knowledge and
information transfer.

Logic
Relational norms
and relational
capital function
as self-enforcing
governance
mechanisms.

The impact of
dysfunctional
conficts needs to be
mitigated; functional
conficts should be
exploited.

Understanding the
range of responses
and their causes
enables alliance
partners to predict
response strategies.

Learning about
partners reduces
costs and increases
ease of adaptation in
the alliance.

Implications Protects alliance
partners against
misappropriation
and opportunism
and functions as
a lubricant for
cooperation and
adaptation.

Active confict
management
enables alliance
partners to improve
the quality of
alliance processes.

Improved resource
allocation as frm
can anticipate
partner’s responses
to adversity.

Increases likelihood
of alliance success,
specifcally in
terms of learning
objectives.

Downside
Requires substantial
investments; misuse
may exacerbate
tensions.

Requires further
validation;
governance and
outcome implications
are unclear.

Potential threat
of knowledge
leakage; learning
requires substantial
investments.

Requires
investments; an
optimal alliance
governance form
does not exist.

update their expectations or the governance form may become ineffcient. We previously
explicated how alliance design can safeguard against unforeseen circumstances, but here we
discuss four alliance management approaches that suggest unique perspectives on how to deal
with the soft side of alliance management: (1) relational governance, (2) confict management,
(3) response strategies and (4) inter-partner learning (see Table 7.1).

Relational governance theory (RGT)
Relational governance theory (RGT) offers a valuable complement to classical contracting
(MacNeil 1978) by emphasizing the importance of social and relational processes as building
blocks of effcient and effective alliances. Classical contract law relied primarily on the legal
framework as a mechanism to plan exchanges, (re)negotiate contracts and resolve contractual
conficts; RGT considers legal mechanisms costly in terms of resources and time.Alternatively,
relational governance thus governs and guides parties such that they behave in a mutually benefcial manner because of their common understanding of relational norms and relational capital.
Relational norms rest on the premise that for alliance contracts to function, a set of common unwritten social rules must exist to describe the unwritten social rules that guide partner
frms’ behaviours in particular situations and enhance cooperation and outcomes. Relational
norms generally pertain to notions of fexibility, solidarity and information exchange (Heide
94
Alliance management
and John 1992). Flexibility implies that partners expect to make adjustments in their ongoing
relationship in order to ft changing circumstances; it facilitates adaptation to unforeseen contingencies. Solidarity norms pertain to partners’ anticipation of efforts to preserve the relationship; they signal commitment to continuing the relationship. Information exchange norms
mean that parties will provide certain information that might help their partner, such that it
facilitates problem solving and adaptation. In alliances with high levels of relational norms,
partners can respond effectively to environmental contingencies, extend the time horizon for
evaluating the outcomes of their relationships and refrain from relationship-damaging behaviours (Palmatier et al. 2007). Relational norms promote collaboration, which operates as a
safeguard that allows the parties to work on the relationship and respond to problematic situations without continuously referring to a contract.Thus normative behaviours operate as selfenforcing governance mechanisms, such that managers respond to good social relationships by
acting to support the relationship. When relational norms are absent, however, managers are
likely to respond to poor social relationships with uncooperative behaviours. In the resulting
destructive interaction pattern, partners may engage in repeated efforts to exploit their counterpart’s vulnerability by behaving opportunistically in order to extract additional rewards.
Relational capital is a response to the inadequacies of contracts that enables alliance partners to deal with their bounded rationality and opportunism (White et al. 2007). It refers to
the extent to which parties feel comfortable, rely on trust in their dealings with one another
and commit to the relationship (Ariño et al. 2001).Trust refects the willingness of a party to
be vulnerable to the actions of another party (see Box 7.1), with the expectation that the other
party will perform a particular action important to the party that employs trust, irrespective of
its ability to monitor or control that other party.Trust-based relational capital contributes to a
freer, greater exchange of information and know-how because decision makers do not worry
about protecting themselves from opportunistic behaviour. In turn, commitment refers to an
expectation that behaviours will be directed towards relationship maintenance, with a high
value placed on the joint relationship. Greater commitment enables both parties to achieve
individual and joint goals without raising the spectre of opportunism. Because more committed partners exert effort and balance short-term problems with long-term goal achievement,
higher levels of commitment should be associated with partnership success. If they have a
BOX 7.1 TYPES OF TRUST
The alliance literature identifes diferent types of trust:
•
•
•
•
Trust refers to a structural component, that is when an alliance design invokes trust.
For example, alliance-specifc investments create a mutual hostage situation.
Trust refers to a behavioural component, that is when partners’ conduct invoke
trust. For example, confdence that individual partners have in their mutual reliability and integrity.
Knowledge-based trust emerges through partner interactions as they learn about
each other and develop trust around norms of equity.
Deterrence-based trust entails utilitarian considerations that lead a frm to believe
that a partner will not engage in opportunistic behaviour because of the costly
sanctions that are likely to arise.

Alliance management
•
•
•
95
Good-will trust refers to the belief that a partner intends to allocate its resources
and capabilities rather than engage in opportunistic conduct.
Competence trust pertains to the belief that a partner does possess enough resources
and capabilities to meet the agreements of the alliance contract.
Calculative trust entails the belief that the possible gains realized through the alliance outweigh the possible costs.

Sources: Boersma et al. (2003); Das and Teng (2001); Gulati (1995a); Madhok (1995).

good relationship, the parties might discuss and resolve their potential tensions, such that
relational capital attenuates concerns about goal conficts, opportunism and misappropriation.
As a critical catalyst of alliance progress, it encourages economically effcient alliances, even in
conditions of uncertainty, ambiguity or incomplete information (Palmatier et al. 2007).
Relational governance (i.e. relational norms and capital) thus emerges in alliances that include
socialization between the partners, which itself results in shared beliefs and values, and infuences
partners’ behaviour so as to increase commitment to the alliance (Das and Teng 2001). However,
relational capital focuses on expectations of partner behaviour, whereas relational norms are
mechanisms to infuence behaviour. Frequent and successful partner interactions might drive
the development of close personal relationships that contribute to relational capital building, but
these interactions also reinforce the development of relational norms.These different concepts
still tend to have similar implications for alliance management, however, such that in an alliance
characterized by relational governance, alliance partners are more willing to accommodate one
another’s needs and overcome adversity.Accordingly, they can implement necessary adjustments
to the alliance and rebalance the alliance system, such that parties are confdent that any changes
are in their interests. Furthermore, relational governance pushes parties to focus on mutually
benefcial strategies, rather than exploitation and misappropriation, by shifting their focus from
self-centred behaviours towards behaviours that foster unity through common responsibilities.Tensions that arise in the course of the relationship thus will be treated as joint concerns;
counterparts maintain agreements, perform competently and behave honourably, even without
explicit promises or performance guarantees (Boersma et al. 2003).The task for alliance management is to reinforce the priority of investing in the development of relational norms and capital.
Yet relational governance also suffers several disadvantages. A good relationship eliminates
costly contracts and coordination mechanisms by reducing the need to monitor partners’
behaviour (Dyer 1997). But building a high-quality relationship also demands time and
resources, without any guarantee that the counterpart will cooperate (Ariño et al. 2001).
Moreover, trust in one’s counterpart may precisely induce adverse behaviours, such as betrayal
and setting (too) high expectations, as the counterpart may expect to be forgiven (Ekici 2013).
Furthermore, despite widespread recognition of the importance of relational governance,
prior research has not prescribed the optimal types of governance for dealing with specifc
exchange characteristics. Research that examines relationships between relational governance and other alliance variables (e.g. contracts, alliance-specifc investments) has tended to
produce fragmented fndings (Palmatier et al. 2007).With the conceptual framework provided
in extant relational governance literature, however, we provide insights into the dimensions
and dynamics that underlie alliances, as well as the belief structures and activities necessary for
successful alliance relationships (see Box 7.2 for a more recent view).

96
Alliance management
BOX 7.2 ORGANIZATIONAL JUSTICE
Recent alliance research has drawn on equity and organizational justice theory to explain
alliance behaviour. Organizational justice theory states that (in)equity, (in)justice or (un)
fairness affect the behaviour of alliance partners. Inequity exists when the perceived
inputs and/or outcomes for one frm are inconsistent with the perceived inputs and/
or outcomes of the partner frm. Perceived inequities lead exchange partners to feel as
though they are being under- or over-rewarded, then affect their behaviours in subsequent periods by encouraging parties to change their inputs, which likely results in
suspicion and mistrust by the exchange partner. Equitable outcomes instead create confdence that the parties will not take advantage of each other but rather are concerned
about the other’s welfare. For example, Scheer et al. (2003) fnd that Dutch automobile
dealers react adversely to positive and negative inequities in their relationships with
automobile suppliers, and Luo (2005) shows that alliance proftability increases when
parties share their perceptions of procedural justice, especially compared with situations
marked by asymmetrical perceptions. Despite recent advances, more research is needed
to achieve coherent explanations for alliance behaviour. Poppo and Zhou (2014) demonstrate that procedural fairness partially mediates the effect of contractual complexity,
whereas distributive fairness partially mediates the effect of contractual recurrence in
fostering exchange performance. Luo and colleagues (2015) show that the effect of
strong form opportunism on alliance performance is attenuated by distributive justice,
whereas the effect of weak form opportunism is suppressed by procedural justice and
interactional justice. This suggests that while distributive justice acts to preserve the
formal structure of the exchange, procedural justice and interactional justice support
the informal mechanisms of cooperative interaction.Taken together, the organizational
justice theory holds great promise to explain alliance behaviours, as alliance studies suggest that alliance governance and management must go beyond their coordinating and
safeguarding functions to establish a fair frame of reference.
Sources: Greenberg (1987); Luo (2005); Luo et al. (2015); Poppo and Zhou (2014);
Scheer et al. (2003).

Confict management
Conficts in alliances pertain to a perceived divergence of interests, or the belief that partners’
current aspirations cannot be achieved simultaneously (White et al. 2007). Confict is generally imagined as destructive because it creates negative reactions that can intensify partner tensions (Peng and Shenkar 2002). Moreover, conficts induce heightened competitive processes,
create misperceptions of alliance progress and stimulate a sense of the inequitable distribution
of alliance outcomes.They also can give rise to distrust and anxiety, reduce the level of cooperation and effcient integration of activities and hamper alliance performance (Ding 1997).
When confict leads to overt aggression or passive resistance, it harms alliance performance in
another way. Thus dysfunctional conficts have negative effects in terms of strategic alliance
collaboration, and partners who perceive them tend to consider themselves obstructed from
achieving their objectives.

Alliance management
97
Dysfunctional conficts arise for various reasons. Ring and Van de Ven (1994) argue that
coordination and effciency concerns due to opportunism and injustice are responsible for
inter-partner confict, but Khanna (1998) cites incompatibilities between private and common benefts. Das and Teng (2002) also suggest that conficts result from misft across organizational routines, technologies, decision-making styles and preferences; emerging private
interests and opportunistic behaviour; or ferce competitions outside the alliance.White et al.
(2007) instead attribute conficts to cultural differences between partners engaged in international alliances. Thus, the initial alliance conditions and internal and external contingencies
induce conficts and require a response from alliance managers.
To deal with confict, researchers propose various confict resolution strategies—some of
which are akin to negotiation strategies. Bradford et al. (2004) thus distinguish among collaboration (explore integrative solutions), accommodation (accept counterpart’s perspective) and
confrontation (advocacy of one perspective), whereas White and colleagues (2007) distinguish
a harmony strategy, which stresses cooperative behaviour, from a confrontation strategy, with
a focus on competitive behaviour, and from a regulatory strategy, stressing rule-based behaviour. Lin and Germain (1998) present problem solving (seeking mutually satisfying solutions),
compromising (seeking middle ground), forcing (imposing solution) and legalistic (resorting
to contract) strategies. However, confict resolution tends to be conditional on the type of
strategy used and its match with the type of confict at issue. Lin and Germain (1998) thus
reveal that a problem-solving strategy improves joint venture performance, but a legalistic
strategy has a negative infuence. According to Bradford et al. (2004), a collaborative confict
reduction strategy thus reduces the negative effect of conficts for relational and task conficts,
but an accommodation strategy only reduces relational conficts, the confrontation confict
strategy only reduces task conficts and any misalignment exacerbates the impact of conficts.
In all these classifcations, however, the apparently destructive nature of conficts is primary, even if other studies suggest that conficts may not be very detrimental to alliances.
Functional conficts create a positive effect and a constructive contribution to the collaboration (Morgan and Hunt 1994) because such conficts stimulate interactions among alliance partners. Knowledge sharing and creation results from functional confict in trusting
conditions because trust improves the quality of dialogue and discussions in the alliance
(Panteli and Sockalingam 2005). Refusing to discuss conficts means inhibiting creativity
and innovation. Any conficts resolved amicably can be regarded as functional because they
ultimately prevent stagnation, stimulate interest and curiosity, and provide a means to resolve
the conficts, which then increases productivity. Functional conficts also might initiate a
critical review of past actions, more frequent and effective communications between alliance
partners, a more equitable distribution of system resources and standardization of the confict
resolution modes available.
Active management of conficts thus forces alliance members to disagree and debate the
merits of their alternative solutions, which can mitigate the negative effects of conficts and
exploit their benefcial aspects. However, if conficts cannot be resolved, tensions escalate
and the dissolution of the partnership becomes inevitable. Despite the importance of dealing
actively with conficts, we also need to consider the hazards associated with confict management. It demands substantial investments, during both the formation and management stages.
Designing confict resolution mechanisms ex ante and applying them ex post is particularly
costly.The misuse of confict resolution techniques may also have detrimental consequences
for alliance continuity. If managers employ force or confrontation to resolve an inter-partner
confict, they may even contribute to confict escalation instead of resolution.

98
Alliance management
Response strategies
As alliances progress, partners’ frms deploy a wide range of response strategies to solve adverse
situations (Ariño and de la Torre 1998). Response strategies entail relationship-focused reactions
that managers use to resolve dissatisfying situations, such as economic under-performance and
poor working relationships (Tjemkes and Furrer 2010)1. Response strategy research provides
a particularly deep understanding of a broader range of relationship-destroying and relationship-preserving responses and their antecedents. Therefore, understanding response strategy
behaviour is critical for alliance management, as anticipating partners’ response behaviour
enables alliance managers to allocate resources effciently and effectively to either restore a
relationship or gradually disengage from it.
Hirschman (1970) initially identifes exit, voice and loyalty as three alternative responses
to organizational decline, organized along a constructive–destructive dimension. Extending
Hirschman’s framework with a fourth strategy—namely neglect (Farrell 1983; Rusbult et al.
1982)—results in the EVLN (exit–voice–loyalty–neglect) typology.The EVLN typology represents a parsimonious conceptualization of response strategies and derives its strength from the
underlying two-dimensional structure into which the four response strategies are organized.
This structure contains an active–passive dimension and a constructive–destructive dimension,
with the four response strategies located in quadrants: exit as active–destructive, voice as active–
constructive, loyalty as passive–constructive and neglect as passive–destructive. More recent
alliance research has refned and increased the number of response strategies to the seven listed
here (Tjemkes and Furrer 2011):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Exit indicates a disinclination to continue the current alliance and refects the most
destructive response. Managers using this response do not see any possibility of dealing
effectively with the adverse situation.
Opportunism entails an active intention to increase benefts from the alliance in ways
that are explicitly or implicitly prohibited. Managers using this response seek to improve
their performance covertly.
Aggressive voice consists of persistent efforts to solve an adverse situation, regardless of
the partner’s ideas. Managers using an aggressive voice impose their views forcefully and
actively on their counterparts, without necessarily trying to avoid confict.
Creative voice refers to voicing novel and potentially useful ideas in an attempt to overcome an adverse situation unilaterally, by proposing constructive solutions.
Considerate voice represents an attempt to change the situation by communicating in a
relationship-preserving manner.Alliance managers consider their own concerns as well as
those of their partner by discussing the situation with the intention of developing mutually satisfactory solutions.
Patience (which replaces loyalty) involves silently abiding the issues, with the hope that
things will improve in the future. Alliance managers voluntarily ignore the issue and
expect the adverse situation to resolve itself.
Neglect means allowing an alliance to deteriorate.A neglectful alliance manager expends
minimal effort in maintaining the partnership and ignores possible ways to solve the situation, leading to the eventual dissolution of the alliance.

Three distinct factors explain why alliance managers prefer distinct response strategies:
individual-level, alliance-level and environmental-level determinants (Tjemkes and Furrer 2011).

Alliance management
99
At the individual level, alliance managers’ personal characteristics infuence their decision making
in general and their use of response strategy in particular. For example, managers’ locus of control and risk aversion tends to infuence their response strategy preferences. Internally oriented
alliance managers, who believe in their power over events, are likely to adopt active response
strategies, whereas externally oriented managers, believing they have little or no control over
events, use passive strategies. Risk aversion refects attitudes towards risk and also infuences
response strategy preferences. Risk-averse alliance managers might prefer relatively low risks and
place greater emphasis on negative consequences, which might lead them to prefer a constructive response (such as the creative voice). In contrast, risk-prone managers facing adverse situations are more likely to engage in more risky response strategies, such as an aggressive voice and
opportunism.
Building on social exchange theory (Blau 1964) and interdependence theory (Thibaut
and Kelley 1959), response strategy research proposes that response preferences depend on
alliance-level exchange variables (Geyskens and Steenkamp 2000; Ping 1993; Tjemkes and
Furrer 2010). For example, economic satisfaction pertains to managers’ evaluations of the
fnancial outcomes of an alliance. Economic under-performance indicates that alliance managers perceive a discrepancy between prior expectations and desired fnancial results, which
requires an active response (for example, opportunism and the considerate voice) to resolve
the adversity rapidly. In contrast, economically satisfed managers prefer passive responses.
Social satisfaction, on the other hand, pertains to managers’ evaluations of the psycho-social
aspects of an alliance. Low social satisfaction creates greater suspicion about a counterpart’s
intentions and reduces managers’ expectations of the relationship’s potential future benefts.
Therefore, managers who are dissatisfed with relationship quality within the alliance may
terminate it rather than try to save it through constructive responses. Managers who are satisfed with the relationship, meanwhile, tend to appreciate contact with their counterparts and
are more likely to use constructive response strategies. The presence of exit barriers is also
infuential; unilateral, alliance-specifc investments trigger constructive response strategies and
inhibit destructive strategies.This is because constructive responses reduce the risk of losing
the investments if the relationship terminates prematurely. In an adverse situation without
alternatives, managers have strong incentives to make the current alliance work and are likely
to respond actively and constructively to improve the situation.
Competitive intensity and technological change are environmental-level antecedents of
response strategy preference. Competitive intensity is the degree of rivalry between competitors in an industry, characterized by industry-wide use of tactics such as aggressive pricing,
high levels of advertising, product introductions or adding services to prevent customers from
switching to competitors. Firms that operate in industries with high levels of competitive
intensity must preserve the quality of their existing alliances in order to secure the resources
they provide, which increases the likelihood of constructive strategies, such as the creative
voice. In contrast, frms in industries characterized by low competitive intensity are more willing to put the alliance relationship at risk and opt for destructive response strategies, such as
exit, opportunism or neglect.Technological turbulence refers to the unpredictability and rate
of change of technology in the external environment. In an environment with low turbulence,
a frm may beneft from close relationships with alliance partners, so it relies on and preserves
these relationships through constructive responses to develop and diffuse innovations. In markets with high technological turbulence, on the other hand, product and process technologies
are relatively unstable. Firms have need for emerging capabilities possessed by alternative partners, which means they are more likely to use destructive responses in existing relationships.

100 Alliance management
In addition to these three levels of determinants, alliance partners may also develop
dynamic interaction patterns of actions–reactions in such a way that they use response strategies to address their partner’s behaviour. Such patterns are governed by the principle of
complementarity, in that correspondence occurs on the constructive–destructive dimension
(constructive strategies invite constructive strategies; destructive strategies invite destructive
strategies).The active–passive dimension is marked by reciprocity (active strategies invite passive strategies; passive strategies invite active strategies). Although correspondence and reciprocity are distinct interaction patterns, the combination of the two governs strategic alliance
development over time. For example, Ariño and de la Torre’s (1998) case study of two frms
engaged in an international joint venture provides anecdotal evidence that a larger (smaller)
discrepancy in effciency and equity perceptions makes the relationship more (less) likely to
deteriorate through reciprocal destructive behaviour. Combining both patterns could lead to
either a self-sustaining, reinforcing system of collaborating and commitment, or a downward
spiral of confictual collaboration and alliance termination.
In summary, response strategy research has advanced alliance management by presenting
a coherent typology of relationship-destroying and relationship-preserving response strategies, as well as their causes. The typology improves decision making in ongoing alliances, as
it enables alliance managers to recognize, and therefore anticipate, partner frms’ actions in a
timely manner. However, two issues warrant further exploration. In the context of alliances,
responses to adversity do not occur in a governance vacuum.Whereas deterrence mechanisms
such as contracts, mutual hostages and monitoring are designed to reduce the likelihood of
destructive responses, mechanisms such as participative decision making and revenue sharing
stimulate constructive responses.The fact that alliance design characteristics are incomplete in
nature means they leave room for various response strategy interaction patterns; therefore, the
relationship between alliance design and response strategies needs to be better understood.
Furthermore, to avoid premature alliance termination and anticipate the impact of response
strategy use, there is a need for greater insight into the short- and long-term performance
implications of using response strategies.

Inter-partner learning
In the context of alliance management, inter-partner learning refers to the extent to which
partner frms create a regular and repeatable pattern of routines that support knowledge and
information transfer (Chai 2003).As the relationship unfolds and parties develop and deploy
learning processes, they can exchange knowledge and information more easily (Simonin
1999). Learning about and with the partner entails knowledge and information transfers,
both of which facilitate alliance management. As frms learn about their alliance partners,
they learn how to interface and communicate with them (Cummings and Teng 2003).This
type of learning involves the process rather than the content of learning (that is, inter-frm
learning), which allows partners to revisit and revise their expectations and to gain a deeper
understanding of their counterparts. In removing information-processing barriers between
parties, there are three reasons supporting the claim that inter-partner learning fosters alliance success: (1) increased openness, (2) transfer of tacit knowledge and (3) reduced risk of
exchange hazards.
Inter-partner learning encourages relationship openness, which is the extent to which
parties are willing and able to share information and communicate openly (Inkpen 2000).

Alliance management
101
Extensive communication contributes to meaningful and timely information sharing. For
example, by transferring staff, document exchange, setting up joint teams and developing best
practice guidelines, partners’ knowledge transfer mechanisms contribute to the quality, variety
and amount of information shared (Chai 2003). Openness also helps parties learn about how
to work together and increases awareness of their individual interests, which contributes to a
climate that eases alliance management.
Inter-partner learning reduces the diffculties implicit in the transfer of tacit knowledge
(Simonin 1999). The fact that tacit knowledge is specifc to its context makes it diffcult to
formalize and communicate (Nonaka 1994). The ‘sticky’ nature of such knowledge means
the incremental cost of transferring it in a form that is usable by the recipient is high. Learning enables parties to reduce the costs associated with fnding and accessing different types
of valuable knowledge and also motivates them to participate and openly share valuable
knowledge. Furthermore, learning helps parties to acquire the subjective viewpoints of their
partners and develop a common language. Thus, inter-partner learning enhances partners’
awareness, which teaches them how to make the alliance work.
As uncertainty about the performance of the alliance grows, so too does the risk of
exchange hazards. However, inter-partner learning decreases the likelihood of opportunistic
behaviour, goal conficts, and appropriation and spillover concerns because it constitutes an
informal feedback mechanism that provides partners with signals about one another’s conduct; in other words, it increases the risk of detection. Inter-partner learning also eases the
distribution and interpretation of knowledge and information, which motivates parties to
participate and share openly strategic intents, resources and knowledge, thereby pre-emptively
reducing the risk of undesirable spillovers, free-riding behaviour and expensive confict resolution tactics (Dyer and Nobeoka 2000).
In conclusion, as partners learn in collaboration, they become aware and recognize the
need to overcome differences in their structure, processes and routines, or ways to combine
these resources constructively in order to make cooperation more effcient (Doz 1996).
However, inter-partner learning also presents some risks. First, openness constitutes a threat
in that the partner frm could take advantage and act opportunistically. For example, it
might use acquired information to appropriate proprietary knowledge but withhold its own
relevant information. Second, initiating learning processes requires substantial investments,
as employee transfers, joint product information sessions and the codifcation of implicit
know-how demand time, energy and resources. There are currently no clear guidelines to
inform alliance managers how to seek a balance between the potential benefts and the
associated costs.

Alliance design and management
Hennart (2006) argues that crafting an initial alliance structure is both easier and more crucial than its ex-post management. In contrast, de Rond and Bouchikhi (2004) postulate that
an understanding of alliance performance requires a rich and detailed account of alliance
management. Doz (1996) takes the middle ground, claiming that both alliance design and
alliance management are critical to alliance success. Parties in failing alliances were unable
to overcome initial design faws, whereas those in successful alliances made adaptations to
the ongoing relationship (Salk 2005). The observation that alliance structure and alliance
processes both matter is in line with conclusions from prior alliance research (Contractor
102 Alliance management
2005). It is likely that structural decisions and management decisions directly and interactively
infuence alliance outcomes—an observation which is corroborated by the results of a review
on alliance governance dynamics conducted by Majchrzak and colleagues (2014).The results
suggest that alliance arrangements are inherently instable, that instability does not necessarily
contribute to detrimental outcomes and that positive or negative outcomes depend on the
pattern of dynamics exhibited as a relationship progresses. For example, in a multi-loop fow
pattern, positive outcomes can be expected as changes in contract framing, interaction style,
decision-making and organizational structure positively reinforce one another.Although conclusive empirical evidence is not yet available, some relevant insights have emerged regarding
alliance dynamics, specifcally when focusing on the relationship between alliance design and
management.
One stream of studies refects the ongoing debate about the substitutive or complementary relationship between contractual and relational governance (Albers et al. 2016; Krishnan
et al. 2016). Proponents of substitution assert that relational governance operates as a selfenforcing safeguard that is effective and less costly than contractual governance.When frms
work together, they build trust across individual members of the contracting frms, rendering
contracts obsolete. In an examination of business alliances, Lee and Cavusgil (2006) fnd that
relational-based governance is more effective than contractual-based governance in strengthening the inter-frm partnership, stabilizing the alliance and facilitating knowledge transfers.
The positive effects of relational-based governance increase under the pressure of greater
environmental turbulence. Aulakh et al. (1996) reveal that monitoring mechanisms and relational norms determine trust and that higher levels of trust positively infuence sales growth
and market share relative to competitors in cross-border partnerships. In contrast, advocates of
complementarity argue that alliance success depends on the alignment between contractual
and relational governance, which, if properly aligned, reinforce each other. Poppo and Zenger
(2002) report that complementing customized contracts with relational governance results in
higher levels of alliance performance. Similarly, Luo (2002) shows that contract completeness
guides the course of operations, that ex-post cooperation can overcome the limitations of
contracts and that both drive alliance performance independently and interactively. Conducting a study within the biotechnology industry, Kim (2014) reports that alliances characterized
by high levels of exchange hazards utilize both formal and informal mechanisms, supporting
the complements hypothesis, whereas those alliances with lower levels of exchange hazards
utilize only one type of governance mechanism. Reporting on the results of a meta-analysis,
Krishnan and colleagues (2016) show, for example, that under conditions of high behavioural uncertainty and low-to-moderate levels of environmental uncertainty, the use of trustbased governance alongside contractual governance might enhance the latter’s effectiveness,
whereas when both behavioural and environmental uncertainty are high, contractual governance hurts alliance performance while trust-based governance does not function at its best
either. Despite these advances, this debate remains unresolved, even as studies consistently
suggest that the relationship between contractual and relational governance depends on the
type and level of trust (Lui and Ngo 2004), the completeness of the contract (Luo 2002), the
alliance development stage (Jap and Ganesan 2000) and environmental dynamics (Lee and
Cavusgil 2006). Therefore, alliance managers must seek a balance between contractual and
relational governance.
Other studies have noted the relationships among initial formation conditions, postformation processes and alliance outcomes. In a retailer–supplier setting, Jap and Ganesan
Alliance management
103
(2000) found that a retailer’s specialized investments exert a negative effect on its perceptions of supplier commitment. A supplier’s specialized investments and relational norms, on
the other hand, increase the retailer’s perception of supplier commitment, and explicit contracts are associated with perceptions of low supplier commitment. Furthermore, the retailer’s
perceptions of supplier commitment increase its evaluations of supplier performance and
satisfaction but relate negatively to confict. Schilke and Cook (2015) suggest that contractual safeguards increase partner trustworthiness because a contract, in which constraints are
explicitly written down, encourages partners to act in a trustworthy manner, particularly if an
alliance partner lacks a favourable reputation.Ali and Larimo (2016) show that structural (i.e.
symmetric dependence and resource dependence) and social mechanisms (i.e. trust, communication and cultural adaptation) reduce opportunism. These fndings also correspond with
results reported by Doz (1996) and Lane et al. (2001) that learning performance benefts are
derived from the combination of initial conditions and post-formation processes. However,
Tjemkes (2008) reports that the impact of alliance design on alliance performance depends
on the alliance objective: a direct effect for fnancial objectives, a fully mediated effect through
relational processes for learning objectives and a partially mediated effect through relational
processes for strategic objectives.This suggests that alliance design functions as an architecture
for alliance management but also that the more detailed and complex an alliance design is, the
less latitude alliance managers have to steer alliance progress.This discussion leads to the three
following main conclusions:
1
2
3
Alliance management is critical to the effective functioning of alliances in that it compels
alliance partners to manage discrepancies, adversities and tensions.
Alliance management requires decisions that directly affect alliance continuity expectations, mainly through building and deploying relational governance, engaging in active
confict management, formulating and implementing response strategies to adversity and
learning about partners, in order to manage the alliance successfully.
The related decisions are not discrete or stand-alone choices; their results are likely to
interact. Moreover, alliance management can be constrained and/or facilitated by initial
alliance design decisions. Successful alliances overcome alliance design faws through alliance management.

Alliance management: decision-making steps
Alliances progress across management intervention cycles, instigated by the monitoring of
outcome and process discrepancies and by initiatives to deal with these discrepancies, and, if
required, to develop, communicate and implement corrective measures. In turn, by monitoring, alliance managers are able to see the effect of these measures.That is, systematic attention
should be given to monitoring the alliance’s progress, as well as any internal and external conditions that might threaten its success. Using the results of such monitoring, alliance managers
can assess the extent to which unforeseen circumstances are, or could become, a threat or an
opportunity. Guided by these assessments, the manager then must decide whether to take
corrective action. If interventions are required, the manager can decide where to focus those,
which mechanisms are appropriate and who is responsible for implementing the corrective
measures.To facilitate such complex and diffcult activities, we present fve steps that should
inform decision making during the alliance management stage (see Figure 7.1).

104
Alliance management
1
Manage
day-to-day activities
Communicate to everyone involved the principles and goals described in the
implementation plan; focus on execution of tasks, resource deployment,
monitoring, supportive management styles and integration of activities .
Invest in relational governance, engage in active conflict resolution, anticipate
responses to adversity and encourage interpartner learning.

2
Monitor
progress
Monitor alliance progress, outcomes and effect of prior interventions to inform
alliance management (see alliance evaluation for more details).

3
Decide on
corrective
measures
4
Intervene and
communicate
FIGURE 7.1
Decide on corrective measures; focus on maintaining progress, flexibility,
opportunities, resources, customers and personnel .
Corrective measures shape alliance development path; the impact of changes in
alliance design, management and evaluation should be assessed, for example with
the partner fit framework.
Communicate with partner about intended corrective measures, preferably
develop and implement adaptations together.
Formulate and execute an intervention plan that features the nature, content and
magnitude of the change; who is responsible; and when it will be implemented.

Decision-making steps: alliance management
Step 1: manage day-to-day activities
The frst priority of alliance management is to get the alliance started, mainly by focusing
on the daily activities agreed on in the alliance negotiation and design stages. Managers must
understand the expectations, the new processes and the activities associated with the alliance.
The principles and goals described in the implementation plan therefore should be executed
visibly and, if necessary, reviewed or altered. For example, alliance managers are responsible for
ensuring that all involved staff members understand their role and tasks in the alliance and that
alliance operations are integrated according to plan. Management styles should adopt a ‘big
picture’ attitude, eliminate any ‘us versus them’ thinking and keep motivation high.
Frequent communication across alliance teams, such as through meetings or joint training,
can help encourage their common perceptions. Communications that even go beyond alliance
issues also are essential for replenishing the reservoir of relational capital. In addition, emerging
tension and conficts should be dealt with proactively.The impact of destructive conficts, such
as disagreements about appropriation, must be mitigated, but constructive confict, such as
cultural differences, should be exploited effectively. Understanding potential responses should
be the goal of any alliance manager because predicting whether partners will respond actively–
passively or constructively–destructively will help managers steer their alliances by dealing
promptly with expectation discrepancies. Finally, a persistent focus on inter-partner learning
enables managers to identify potential hazards and to come to adequate solutions.

Step 2: monitor progress
To identify potential threats to alliance continuity in a timely manner, it is important to
monitor alliance outcomes and processes.We elaborate on the design and use of performance
metric systems in Chapter 8, but in particular, managers should attend to the following.

Alliance management
•
•
•
•
105
External threats and opportunities.Are there any external developments (e.g. in the partner’s organization or broader environment) that might harm or reinforce the alliance’s
value creation potential?
Alliance performance. Has the alliance realized outcomes effciently in terms of fnancial
profts, learning and competitiveness? Is the alliance growing as expected? Is the distribution of outcomes equitable?
Relational processes. Are partners satisfed with the quality of the working relationship
and alliance staff? In the case of conficts, are they resolved properly? And are the partners
fexible in accommodating necessary adaptations?
Alliance partner. Does the partner still believe in the importance of the alliance? Changes
in the partner’s environment could have altered its view of the alliance.

Step 3: decide on corrective measure(s)
Based on their assessments, alliance managers must decide if corrective measures should
be taken, and if so which, to ensure the alliance continues to operate effciently and effectively. Consistent with the prescriptions provided through the book, alliance adaptations
might target alliance design, such as the board composition of a joint venture, compensation
structure, task division, decision making and alliance management itself, including relational
governance, confict resolution and inter-partner learning. In addition, modifcations may
be required in the performance metric system due to emerging objectives. To overcome
identifed problem areas (or address opportunities) in the alliance, managers should recognize that discrepancies in outcomes and processes may evoke partner responses ranging
from dysfunctional, which ultimately leads to alliance termination, to more functional reactions aimed at minimizing the damage and preventing reoccurrence.When deciding on the
nature, content and timing of corrective measures, alliance managers should thus consider
the following.
•
•
•
•
•
Flexibility.Any action should preserve the fexibility of the alliance.
Opportunities. Actions are needed not only to solve problems but also to create new
opportunities.
Resources. Avoid exhausting available resources with actions, and pay close attention to
the costs and benefts when making investments.
Field of intervention. An action in any particular feld (e.g. operational unit, team)
requires a clear understanding of the effects on other felds.
Key personnel. Determine who will take the actions and who will be most affected by
those actions.

Corrective measures shape the developmental path of an alliance, such that each
response to an outcome and/or process discrepancies has multiple repercussions. Assessing
the possible implications is important as it provides information to managers whether to
proceed to implementation or to abstain from management interventions, such that they
continue the alliance but adopt diminished expectations. It is important to recognize that
design modifcations are likely to affect, for example, alliance processes, thus potential
adaptations should be assessed while considering the trade-off between contractual and
relational governance. To anticipate the impact of corrective measures, alliance managers
106 Alliance management
could use the partner ft framework (see Chapter 3). For example, managers may ask the
following questions:
•
•
•
•
•
•
To what extent do adaptations affect resource contributions and the alliance’s value creation potential (i.e. resource complementarity)?
To what extent do changes affect partners’ strategic visions (i.e. strategic ft)?
To what extent are decision-making structures, control systems and performance metrics
affected by intended changes (i.e. organizational ft)?
To what extent are cultural differences resolved through managerial intervention (i.e.
cultural ft)?
To what extent do changes infuence operational procedures, systems and task allocation
(i.e. operational ft)?
Do interventions affect personal interactions between alliance staff from the partners (i.e.
human ft)?

Step 4: intervene and communicate
Building on the prior assessments, it is critical that alliance managers formulate and implement
an intervention plan that features at least the nature, content and magnitude of the change, who
is responsible and when it will be implemented. Communication processes underlie most alliance functions, so communication behaviour is critical to successful implementation. Providing
advance warning of intended adaptations to an alliance partner is important because management interventions that could be viewed as a betrayal of joint interests (whether intentional or
circumstantial) must be preceded by ample notice and appropriate explanations. For example,
joint decisions to restructure or discontinue alliance activities presumably cause partners to
initiate a dialogue about value creation, value appropriation and fairness, considering the value
of each partner’s contribution.This dialogue could result in a renegotiation of the value appropriation clauses of the alliance, such that it creates a new balance, acceptable to the partners, and
refects changes in the external environment. Moreover, joint participation in decision making,
planning and goal setting ensures that required information is timely, accurate, adequate and
credible.Alternatively, although under certain circumstances unilateral alliance adaptations signal long-term commitment, more often one-sided enforced modifcations trigger an escalating
spiral of destructive behaviours ultimately resulting in premature dissolution of the alliance.
Therefore, we recommend preparing and implementing modifcations jointly, for example by
actively engaging the alliance partner in alliance monitoring (i.e. Step 2).

Summary
In this chapter, we have noted the soft side of strategic alliances.Alliance management is responsible for executing the alliance design and governing day-to-day operations.The main objective is to advance alliance progress and, if required, initiate corrective measures. To this end,
partner frms may invest in relational governance, use confict resolution techniques, respond
adequately to adversities and stimulate inter-partner learning. However, the bandwidth of the
management effort depends on the alliance design because the structural design, such as contractual clauses, decision-making authority and monitoring mechanism, constrain or facilitate a
frm’s ability to initiate and execute alliance management.Alliance management is also diffcult
because of its inherently unstable nature; it requires substantial investment in terms of resources,
Alliance management
107
energy and time. To assist alliance managers to maintain viable alliances, we have provided a
fve-step procedure that enables them to determine the cause of dissatisfaction, develop appropriate responses, assess the impact of potential corrective measures and execute an intervention.

CASE: TNO–HOOGENDOORN2
TNO is a Dutch-based knowledge organization that applies scientifc knowledge to
strengthen the innovative power of industry and government, which it does by assisting in
the various stages of product development, from idea generation to implementation and
testing. Hoogendoorn is an expert in glasshouse horticulture, and its computers and software have controlled a wide range of climatic conditions for more than 40 years. Hoogendoorn markets its horticultural computers across the world through a global network that is
constantly kept up to date with new and innovative product developments. In 2005, TNO
and a business unit of Hoogendoorn called Growth Management started to collaborate on
a new innovative product: Sensiplant.
Hoogendoorn and TNO signed a letter of intent in July 2005, and expressed their intention to proceed with the product development roadmap, to the point that an agreement
between the two parties would be set for further commercialization of the Sensiplant project. Sensiplant is an information system based on wireless technology that measures the
soil humidity of pot plants. Sensiplant’s self-organizing wireless network makes the system
unique, and the communication of the system is based on a self-organizing protocol patented by TNO. Hoogendoorn is responsible for the provision of the required hardware, as
well as the sales, marketing and distribution of the product.
Between 2005 and 2007, TNO developed the technology further, and in 2007, the alliance to commercialize the technology became formally effective. A core part of the alliance
agreement pertained to TNO licensing its proprietary technology to Hoogendoorn. Some
issues however emerged straight away. TNO demanded that Hoogendoorn paid an annual
fee, even if sales were below expectations. Although the request was met with resistance,
Hoogendoorn complied after extensive negotiations. The development of Sensiplant also
had its challenges. Although the hardware seemed to work, the software contained several
bugs, which were caused by changes in the initial hardware conditions. To resolve these
adversities, a third party, MUCO, was approached. The addition of MUCO to the alliance
fxed the hardware and software issues, but also complicated alliance management, as TNO
alliance managers perceived that the other two partners were working against it. In addition, tension developed between TNO and Hoogendoorn as the latter decided unilaterally
to postpone the release of version 1.0, following initial tests that revealed customers were
dissatisfed with Sensiplant’s technical performance.
Despite the setbacks, in 2008, version 1.1 of Sensiplant was fully operational, and
Hoogendoorn was ready to launch it on the market. The release of the 1.1 version again
created conficts, as Hoogendoorn launched the product internationally, despite contractual clauses stipulating that the Dutch market would be approached frst. In addition, the
alliance came under pressure as customers provided serious negative feedback about the
product. Complaints about cabling, hardware and software reached the partners. However,
TNO decided to resolve these issues harmoniously and assist Hoogendoorn in any way it
could. This proactive approach and building on customer feedback resulted in the release
of version 1.2.

108 Alliance management
TNO was under the impression that version 1.2 was selling successfully. However, it was
unexpectedly informed by Hoogendoorn that it had stopped selling Sensiplant because of
customer complaints and a large discrepancy between sales targets and actual outcomes. At
this time, two Hoogendoorn managers who had been involved in the project from its inception also left the company. A new team was forged to focus on the future of Sensiplant,
and two future directions were identifed in early 2009: either the project was to be terminated or the product would undergo an upgrade. Convinced about the product’s potential,
Hoogendoorn created a crisis team that searched for a solution, and the R&D department of
the company started to investigate various technical options.
On the TNO side, however, some frustrations started to emerge as the software had
worked well for a while, and TNO was keen to sign the user acceptance: a formal document
stating that (1) a group of users who tested Sensiplant confrm it is working properly and
(2) that the product is ready to be launched commercially. But, confronted with market
uncertainties, Hoogendoorn procrastinated about signing it.
Up until this point, TNO had been very fexible because it was important for them to have
a commercially viable product. Thus, TNO imposed some pressure on Hoogendoorn, and
the user acceptance was signed at a meeting in mid-2009. Following this meeting, one manager from TNO and one from Hoogendoorn developed a plan to launch Sensiplant version
1.3. However, another setback confronted the partners as the manufacturer of the hardware
went bankrupt. Nonetheless, both parties were committed to the product’s success, and they
agreed to postpone the launch. Despite Hoogendoorn again confronting problems in product
development, prior experience gave them suffcient confdence in marketability of the product.
The economic crisis in 2008–2009 made TNO and Hoogendoorn shift their attention
to the fnancial side of the project. The partners decided to adjust the payment scheme to
accommodate Hoogendoorn’s acute fnancial needs. TNO complied with this new arrangement as it deemed the long-term relationship with Hoogendoorn more important than
immediate fnancial returns. In 2010, TNO and Hoogendoorn arrived at the conclusion that
Sensiplant was not a commercially viable product; it seemed to be a ‘nice to have’ product
but not a ‘need to have’ one. Furthermore, new and cheaper technologies had entered the
market. Consequently, Hoogendoorn decided to stop investing in Sensiplant and to sell the
remaining stored products (system modules). TNO and Hoogendoorn decided to dissolve
the alliance, and both parties incurred their fnancial losses.

Questions
1
2
Explain why TNO and Hoogendoorn continued the alliance, despite dissatisfactory economic performance.
Describe the alliance’s development. How did alliance management afect the partner
interaction pattern?

Notes
1 This section builds on prior research with Olivier Furrer (University of Fribourg), whom we
acknowledge for his contribution.
2 Interviews with two senior executives of TNO and two senior executives of Hoogendoorn.

8
ALLIANCE EVALUATION
To maintain effective alliances, alliance partners must evaluate alliance performance continuously; monitoring provides the frms with the necessary information to take appropriate
actions, whether doing nothing, adapting the alliance design and management or terminating
the relationship.Alliance evaluation is complex, however, owing primarily to the multifaceted
nature of alliance performance. Most alliance managers focus on intentional outcomes, but
they often neglect assessments of emergent objectives, relational processes and intangible outcomes. Furthermore, they tend to use generic metrics, whereas to be effective, performance
metrics should align with unique alliance characteristics.An ill-designed performance metric
system increases the risk of erroneous decision making, such that alliances might be continued when they should be terminated, and vice versa.To develop and use performance metric
systems, alliance managers must thus understand the nature of alliance performance and the
issues associated with metrics (shown in the frst section). Obtaining insights into various
performance metric approaches supports the development of a balanced performance metric
system (second section).What follows provides a systematic framework with a set of decisionmaking steps for alliance evaluation (third section) and provides a summary before concluding
with some case illustrations.

Issues with alliance performance and metrics
How alliance partners assess and react to discrepancies between their expectations and realized outcomes shapes the developmental path of the alliance; alliance evaluation thus is a critical, complex activity (Christoffersen et al. 2014; Lunnan and Haugland 2008).To deal with the
complexities surrounding alliance evaluation, it is important to understand the multifaceted
nature of alliance performance (Ryan-Charleton et al. 2022), or the degree of accomplishment of goals—be they common or private, initial or emergent—and the extent to which the
pattern of interactions is acceptable to both partners (Ariño 2003). From this defnition, we
derive seven issues that may impede alliance managers’ ability to judge alliance performance
(see Table 8.1).

DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-8
110
Alliance evaluation
TABLE 8.1 Issues with performance metric
Description
Solution
Common
and private
benefts
Alliance outcomes pertain to shared
and individual objectives.

Use measures that provide a combined
picture of alliance partners’ shared and
individual objectives.

Multifaceted
nature
Objectives differ across partners,
alliances are forged with multiple
objectives and alliance processes
affect objective realization.

Use measures that capture both alliance
outcomes (e.g. fnancial, strategic
and learning) and alliance processes
(e.g. relational).

Time horizon
Objective achievement occurs at
different time horizons, and new
objectives may emerge.

Identify prospective (input) and output
indicators and update performance
metrics if necessary.

Intangible
outcomes
Intangible outcomes are diffcult to
value and quantify.

Identify realistic and quantifable proxies
for intangible outcomes; in addition, use
prospective and process metrics.

Management
control
Management control mechanisms
and performance metrics may be
disconnected.

When selecting management control
mechanism, immediately attribute
appropriate metrics.

Alliance types
Different alliance conditions require
different types of metric systems.

Use generic performance metric
template and adapt to the unique
context of the alliance.

Measurement
norms
Expectations tend to be unique for
each alliance and differ across partners.

Provide a systematic framework for the
interpretation of measures.

Sources:Ariño (2003); Kumar and Nti (1998); Perkmann et al. (2011).

Common benefts often constitute an important rationale for alliance formation, related
to the partners’ shared alliance objectives (Khanna 1998). Performance metrics should therefore assess the extent to which partners create value jointly; these objectives might pertain to
profts, market share or product innovation. A set of shared metrics helps alliance managers
to ensure that both partners address alliance adaptations and continually work to maintain
alignment with regard to managing the alliance. Private benefts, on the other hand, depict
individual objectives and pertain to the transfer of knowledge and resources from one partner
to another with the aim of exploiting activities that may not be part of the initial agreement.
Alliances in which partners do not recognize the importance of individual metrics endanger
their success in that awareness of individual interests allows the partners to look for ways
to add value for their partner. Of course, too much emphasis on individual metrics at the
expense of shared metrics will lead to disappointing results, especially if success depends on
both partners’ contributions. Partners who fail to distinguish between common and private
benefts, and forsake metrics in order to capture the extent to which their partners create and
appropriate value, will typically fnd themselves working at cross-purposes.
In the complex organizational arrangements that defne alliances, frm objectives often
depend on a combination of motives (Christoffersen et al. 2014; Kogut 1988). Any performance metric system thus must account for partners attempting to pursue multiple goals.
Even if partners’ objectives converge, they may forge an alliance to realize multiple objectives
Alliance evaluation
111
simultaneously. Focusing on goals in separation negates the interrelated nature of outcomes,
such that resources and activities supporting one goal might undermine the attainment of a
different goal (Ryan-Charleton et al. 2022).Thus, outcome metrics might entail the extent to
which partners achieve economic, strategic and learning objectives. In addition, process metrics relate to the partners’ satisfaction with interaction patterns (Kumar and Nti 1998) or to the
partner’s socially responsible behaviours (Yin and Jamali 2021). Performance metric systems
should account for relational processes by explicitly incorporating metrics that capture partner
dynamics. Moreover, the presence of multiple objectives may set the stage for conficts, infuencing the way partners interact. Patterns of interaction then infuence the ability to realize
objectives.That is, due to the interrelatedness between outcomes and process, a performance
metric system should account for the multifaceted nature of alliance outcomes and processes.
Given the long-time horizons of most alliances, the benefts of collaborations can be realized only after a considerable time. Therefore, effective performance metric systems should
feature prospective indicators that predict the value of benefts over time (Anderson 1990).
Outcome measures refect the intended outcome of a process; prospective indicators refect
the aspects that appear causally related to certain desired outcomes (Perkmann et al. 2011).
Such input-oriented indicators overcome the disadvantages of outcome metrics, in which
the outcomes may be delayed, which implies that information to inform corrective measures
arrives too late. In addition, partners often establish alliances with predefned, intentional
objectives, but as the alliance progresses, new objectives may emerge, which should be assessed
accordingly. For example, if a business alliance transforms into a learning alliance, the metrics
should shift from fnancial to learning metrics. However, knowledge creation is diffcult to
specify ex ante, so the performance metric system should be supplemented with prospective
indicators, such as R&D spending and patenting records.
When alliance outcomes are intangible, as they often are, they are not amenable to direct
measurement. For example, R&D alliances focus on generating new knowledge that is relatively far from commercialization, so the value of any project is diffcult to assess; it remains
uncertain whether the created knowledge will have any future commercial value. Even if it
is clear that the knowledge has some value, it remains diffcult to quantify.The challenge for
performance management, then, is to defne metrics that approximate the value of intangible
outputs. In addition, the use of prospective and process metrics should result in timely and
reliable information.
Management control mechanisms enable alliance partners to monitor each other’s behaviours and the alliance’s progress. To be effective, alliance control should align with the performance metrics. For example, formalized output control might be captured with outcome
metrics. Behavioural control mechanisms can be operationalized through outcome and process metrics; effective social control mechanisms (i.e. relational governance) should be accompanied by process metrics. Setting up a management control system during the alliance design
stage without simultaneously defning the nature, content and target of its performance metrics is likely to lead to fawed management decisions.
Alliances also can be classifed in different ways, such as exploitation or exploration,
cross-border or domestic, and equity or non-equity structures. Accordingly, these various
types should be subject to different dynamics that infuence the choice of performance
metrics. Alliances are also often surrounded by environmental uncertainty, which reduces
the meaning and validity of short-term, quantitative indices of performance and hinders
the use of outcome metrics. Anderson (1990) argues that manufacturing-based joint ventures operating in stable environments can beneft from outcome metrics, but R&D joint
112
Alliance evaluation
BOX 8.1 DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION METRICS
During alliance formation, frms formulate an alliance strategy, select a partner, engage
in alliance negotiations and design the alliance.These stages likely require different sets
of metrics than the alliance post-formation stage, when alliance management executes
the alliance agreement. During the formation stages, metrics should focus on the vision,
strategy alignment, pre-launch development, strategic ft, planning, selection, structuring, negotiation and team selection. These development metrics should give partner
frms and stakeholders a clear understanding of why the alliance is valuable. In contrast,
the implementation metrics might focus on execution, implementation, remediation,
restructuring, re-evaluation, renegotiation, relaunch and termination. These metrics
provide systematic and coherent information to the persons responsible for alliance
operations, which are often not the same as the persons responsible for its formation.
Source: Segil (1998).

ventures operating in dynamic environments will beneft more from input (i.e. prospective)
metrics. Thus performance metrics should align with not just alliance strategies (Cravens
et al. 2000) but also alliance type, governance form and other relevant characteristics (Lunnan
and Haugland 2008).
Assessments often rely on subjective evaluations of the alliance partner’s satisfaction with
the process and outcomes. Even if alliance managers are clear about the alliance objectives,
such clarity is diffcult to communicate to operational staff if the metrics are not well defned
and formalized. Formalized metrics enable better coordination, legitimization, control and
learning compared with ad hoc usages (Vlaar et al. 2007).Therefore, managers must articulate their goals, set targets and incorporate metrics into their management reports—Patzelt
and Shepherd (2008) showed for example how alliances otherwise may extend beyond their
productive life-time. Moreover, alliance managers should formulate reference values and
targets for comparisons with actual performance metrics. Targets can be based on managerial experience, historical performance or other alliances. Subjective assessment will always
have a role, but to measure complex alliance processes, it is sensible to complement it with
objective measures.
A useful performance metric system addresses all these features. Performance metrics provide a way to assess the progress of an alliance over time in terms of specifc activities that can
be quantifed in some form (see also Box 8.1). No single measure can represent all the salient
aspects, so a set of measures is usually required in an effective performance metric system.

Performance metric approaches
A principal motivation for using performance metrics is the notion that only a collection
of conceptually sound measures can properly align frm efforts with its objectives (Christoffersen et al. 2014; Kaplan et al. 2010).We focus on six performance approaches that together
constitute the foundation for a generic performance metric system: (1) economic, (2) strategic, (3) operational, (4) learning, (5) relational and (6) responsible (see Table 8.2).

Alliance evaluation
113
TABLE 8.2 Six performance metrics approaches
Economic
Strategic
Operational
Economic
value
Strategic
value
Operational Learning
Relational
value
outcomes
processes
and processes
Code of
conduct
and societal
impact
Characteristics Easy to
specify,
short-term,
outputoriented.

More diffcult
to specify,
long-term,
outputoriented.

Easy to
specify,
short-term,
output- and
processoriented.

Very diffcult
to specify,
mediumterm input,
output- and
processoriented.

Diffcult
to specify,
mediumterm,
processoriented.

Diffcult
to specify,
short-term
processoriented
and longterm
outcomeoriented.

Indicators
Market share,
business
opportunities,
competitive
position, risk
reduction.

Operating
effciency,
production
times,
product
quality,
customer
retention,
satisfaction.

Managerial,
market,
technological
and product
know-how,
explicit
and tacit
knowledge
exchange.

Trust,
commitment,
harmony,
integrity,
opportunism,
fexibility,
solidarity.

Ethical
conduct,
disclosing
interest,
gender
equality,
labour
conditions,
ecological
impact.

Focus
Profts,
costs,
revenues,
return on
investments.

Learning
Relational
Responsible
Sources:ASAP (2022); Büchel and Thuy (2001); Segil (1998).

Economic approach
An economic approach provides insights into the economic value of the relationship and
the effectiveness of the underlying business processes (Büchel and Thuy 2001).The purpose
is to assess whether an alliance is increasing the economic value of the partner frms. The
theoretical foundation for this economic approach is founded on the theory of fnancial and
capital markets and involves measures such as return on investment, net yearly proft and
increases in shareholder value. Economic metrics refect the fulflment of economic goals and
enable managers to consider the value of the partnership relative to alternative arrangements.
Because of their economic foundation, fnancial benefts are relatively easy to specify and
anticipate ex ante compared with other types of metrics. Furthermore, fnancial metrics have
a short-term time horizon and are outcome-oriented (Anderson 1990), which implies that
alliance partners are more likely to anticipate immediate fnancial returns after the alliance
is implemented. Such metrics can be captured with quantitative indicators, including profts,
cost reductions, cash fows and revenues.
Under-performance on fnancial metrics suggests either that the alliance is not realizing its
economic potential or that a partner frm is unable to appropriate its share of fnancial outcomes.To improve fnancial performance, partners should focus on underlying causes, which
may relate to the alliance objectives, design or management, such as when joint product and
service offerings fail to meet customer demands.The design of the alliance may hinder proft
114
Alliance evaluation
generation if the costs associated with this negotiation, alliance formation and monitoring
outweigh its benefts. In terms of execution, economic under-performance may result from
an under-supply of resources, wastefulness, failure to execute specifc tasks or withholding of
important information. If an alliance is generating economic benefts, however, an inequitable appropriation may also need to be resolved by renegotiating the alliance’s compensation
structure. A shift in the predetermined distribution rules (e.g. royalty fees) could result in a
fairer distribution of fnancial outcomes.

Strategic approach
Insight into the strategic value of the relationship refects the long-term viability of the alliance. Akin to fnancial metrics, a strategic approach emphasizes output criteria, though it
considers outputs over a longer timeframe (Büchel and Thuy 2001). Such metrics are more
diffcult to specify and value because uncertainty increases the time required to achieve these
objectives. The metrics offer measures of effectiveness that go beyond the exclusive use of
fnancial metrics and target factors that, if well managed, result in superior strategic performance. They focus on the core competences that a frm possesses or wants to develop, and
they seek to provide information about how much the alliance assists in this effort. Strategic
metrics can be captured with both qualitative and quantitative indicators, such as new business
opportunities, market share or power, reputation, competitive position, resource protection
and risk reduction.
Under-performance on strategic metrics suggests that the business logic supporting the
alliance is poorly developed and requires adaptation, or even termination, of the partnership. Strategic metrics may also illuminate whether a frm’s competitive advantage is at risk
through resource leakage. For example, a frm’s counterpart could be appropriating proprietary knowhow to strengthen its core competences, or behaving opportunistically and withholding critical information to gain a strategic advantage over its counterparts, which would
be explicit through the use of strategic metrics.

Operational approach
Insight into operational performance is important because it taps directly into the alliance’s
functioning. That is, information obtained through operational metrics provides an indication of the effciency and effectiveness of the primary processes. An operational approach
focuses on output and process criteria but differs from the economic and strategic approaches
in that it consists of metrics that capture day-to-day operations. Such metrics are relatively
easy to specify because they are output-oriented and can be captured by both qualitative and
quantitative indicators. Contingent on the alliance objectives, metrics tapping the production
process might describe product lead times, product quality or operational effciency; marketing efforts can be measured with indicators such as customer retention, customer satisfaction
and customer service.
Operational under-performance indicates that alliance partners are not suffciently committed to making the alliance work on a daily basis. Alternatively, the alliance partners may
possess insuffcient operational ft, which they can deal with through interventions targeted at
aligning the operational processes of the partners. In addition, frms may reconsider the division of operational tasks and adapt their management control mechanisms.

Alliance evaluation
115
Learning approach
Whereas the frst three approaches offer a diverse set of metrics, they are unsuited to capturing inter-frm learning or innovation.Alliances often provide vehicles for creating, acquiring,
sharing and exploiting knowledge between partners; learning metrics take account of both
learning objectives and learning processes, which support these ends (Büchel and Thuy 2001;
Ryan-Charleton et al. 2022). Because of their medium- to long-term orientations, learning outcomes are relatively diffcult to specify and value (Contractor 2001). For example,
an ex-ante assessment of the value of market, technological and production know-how and
managerial skills is complicated because their commercial value depends on the exploitation
of such knowledge. It is thus diffcult, if not impossible, to determine the amount of knowledge creation (e.g. product and market innovation)—let alone formalize parties’ claims to this
realized knowledge—and distribute it according to a predetermined rule. Learning metrics
combine input- and output-oriented notions with a process-oriented approach, and they are
best captured by qualitative indicators, such as the transfer of knowledge about production
processes, marketing know-how, managerial techniques, technological know-how and product development know-how.
Learning under-performance may be attributed to a poorly designed alliance structure. For
example, the initial alliance design might not enhance knowledge creation and/or enable partners to exchange knowledge.Taking the perspective of a single frm, under-performance could
also signal that it is leaking valuable knowledge to a partner, without acquiring knowledge in
turn. Interventions may target alliance scope in that a broader alliance scope increases opportunities to learn, whereas a narrow alliance scope limits knowledge creation and unwanted
transfer. Partners may also reconsider the distribution of tasks and/or redesign their management control system. For example, shared decision making and joint tasks foster learning, but
one-sided decision making and task specialization inhibit learning. Partners may invest in
relational governance because high-quality working relationships facilitate inter-frm learning
while also functioning as a safeguard against misappropriation.

Relational approach
Insight into relational metrics is critical; alliance partners’ behaviours function as a lubricant for
alliance development.To this end, a relational approach focuses on the conduct of the participants in an alliance. Rather than emphasizing output and results, it addresses behaviours and
ongoing processes within the alliance (Büchel and Thuy 2001).These process-oriented metrics
enable the frm to evaluate its relationship status, guided by the assumption that high-quality
partner interaction patterns will support the frm’s alliance success (Kale et al. 2000). Measuring
the status of the relationship enables the frm to obtain information about its partner’s behavioural disposition towards the relationship, such that the frm can take corrective actions to deal
with adverse situations, including opportunistic behaviour, asymmetrical inter-partner learning
and confict (Segil 1998). Essential indicators include the development of trust, commitment,
transparency, ability to deal with conficts and harmony between the partners. Such metrics
tend to be more subjective and tacit in nature, so they must be captured by qualitative indicators.
Under-performance on relational metrics suggests that partners have not developed suffcient relational norms and/or capital.A primary cause stems from the alliance negotiation and
design stages. Distributive negotiation reinforced by hard negotiation tactics may produce a
satisfactory negotiation outcome but damage the quality of the working relationship. Similarly,
116
Alliance evaluation
an alliance design could protect one frm’s interest (e.g. task specialization) but simultaneously
signal distrust to the alliance partner. Repairing damaged working relationships is diffcult and
demands substantial time and energy. During the alliance management stage, partner frms can
demonstrate their commitment with cooperative renegotiations, proactive confict resolution
and constructive responses to adversity.

Responsible approach
Alliance arrangements are increasingly used by frms to enact their societal responsibility
(Niesten and Jolink 2020;Yin and Jamali 2021). On the one hand, societal alliances address
market opportunities while simultaneously generating positive societal (e.g. environmental) impacts. On the other hand, increasingly organizations include codes of conduct as part
of their alliance practices (ASAP 2022). Insight into ‘responsibility’ metrics is critical as the
behaviours and outcomes indicate the extent to which the alliance contributes to partners
being socially responsible. Short-term metrics, capturing behavioural responsibility for example, would include ethical conduct, internal and external communication, and disclosing conficting interests. Long-term metrics, capturing partner’s societal impact for example, would
include gender equality, ecological imprint and labour conditions.Whereas the former should
be integrated into any alliance performance system, the latter could be specifcally relevant to
public–private partnerships (see Chapter 15) and societal alliances (see Chapter 26).
Under-performance on responsibility metrics suggests that partners are not fulflling their
societal responsibility, or at least are not aware.A cause could be that during alliance negotiation and launch, the partners did not articulate and discuss the code of conduct or conceived
societal impact irrelevant (e.g. not discussing the societal ramifcations of a new technology).
Also, partners may ignore signals from internal and external stakeholders, for example, questioning the alliance’s motives. During the alliance negotiation and design stages, the broader
societal impact could be a conversational topic. In addition, imposing behavioural guidelines
and creating clarity about alliance outcomes are critical tasks during alliance management.
Internal and external communication are critical to inform partner frms’ stakeholders.
Drawing on the similarities and differences across these six metric approaches, we suggest
that together they provide a foundation for a coherent performance metric system, akin to a
balanced scorecard (Kaplan et al. 2010). Strategic metrics focus on long-term value creation
within the alliance and provide important information for various stakeholders, including top
management and external parties.The long-term orientation of these metrics enables alliance
managers to reconsider the alliance’s design and management in light of alternative strategies
and other partnerships. Financial metrics provide insights into an alliance’s short-term outcomes: is the alliance contributing economic value to the frm? Operational metrics provide
information about the day-to-day operations, enabling alliance managers to initiate interventions in the alliance’s primary business processes. Learning metrics fulfl a two-fold function:
they provide insights into the partners’ ability to learn with and from each other, and they
reveal the degree to which alliance partners realize their learning objectives. Relational metrics provide insight into the quality of the interpersonal and inter-partner working relationship. Responsibility metrics are critical as they capture the extent to which partners adhere
to a code of conduct and/or to which the alliance arrangement effectuates the partners social
responsibility. A balanced performance metric system that contains all six approaches would
provide alliance managers with a comprehensive, systematic understanding of alliance progress and outcomes (see Box 8.2).

Alliance evaluation
117
BOX 8.2 BALANCED PERFORMANCE METRICS IN THE DUTCH
SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY
The Dutch shipbuilding industry installed a performance metric programme which
aims to enhance its global competitiveness. The primary objective of the programme is the continuous improvement of supply chain performance. By establishing category teams, a shipbuilder clusters all relevant functional domains in the
ship-building process to align suppliers with its goals; the key objective is to prevent
sub-optimization in the supply chain. A balanced set of performance indicators is
used, comprising fve pillars of strategic competitiveness: (1) quality, (2) logistics, (3)
innovation, (4) fexibility and (5) total cost. During workshops, both the category
teams and suppliers participate in designing the key performance indicators. Most
key performance indicators tend to be standard, thus the development of the metric system is neither frm nor relationship-specifc, ruling out possible competitive
interests. Through the co-creation of performance metrics by both the shipbuilders
and their suppliers, involvement improves, which ofers an important advantage for
implementing the change list approach throughout the supply chain. During the
implementation, the standard set of performance metrics is made specifc to each
supplier through the creation of a supplier profle. This profle describes target performance on specifc metrics across all fve strategic pillars, which provides insight
into the performance requests for both shipbuilder and supplier. Actual performance is then measured. The parties together determine improvements to close the
gap between required and actual performance. Improvement plans and progress on
specifc initiatives are discussed regularly in meetings. Through an action learning
approach, the performance metric system itself is evaluated regularly by the supply
chain members, which results in a culture in which continuous improvement is
the norm.

Alliance evaluation: decision-making steps
The main advantage of a comprehensive, balanced performance metric system is that when
it is appropriately formulated, implemented and interpreted, it provides alliance partners
with relevant, reliable and detailed information about alliance performance. It typically
comprises several metrics, standards for performance measurement, measurement techniques, frequency and timing of measurement and reporting, and a reporting format. If metric scores deviate from expectations, partner frms may develop corrective actions to steer
the alliance towards its objectives.Although the formulation and implementation of metrics
may be lengthy, clear metric procedures actually accelerate alliance development rather
than slowing it. However, alliance managers should seek to minimize the administrative
burden involved in operating such a system by tailoring their performance metrics to each
alliance. Developing and implementing a performance metric system thus consists of four
consecutive stages: (1) formulating, (2) implementing, (3) interpreting and (4) assessment
(see Figure 8.1).

118
Alliance evaluation
1
Design performance
metric system
2
Implement performance
metric system
3
Interpret
metric outcomes
4
Assess performance
metric system
FIGURE 8.1
Develop generic performance metric system to benchmark alliances and
transfer experiences across the firm.
Use a generic metric template to formulate tailored performance metrics
consistent with alliance objectives and other alliance characteristics.
Decide about nature and content of metrics: qualitative, input, process, output,
single or multiple indicators, and unilateral or shared.
Formulate procedures in terms of frequency, communication and decisionmakingauthority, and possible actions in case of under- and over-performance.
Document and report evaluation outcomes in line with stakeholders’
requirements.
Decide to continue alliance without intervention, terminate alliance or
continue alliance with intervention.
Assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the performance metric system and,
if needed, develop and implement new performance metrics.
Based on prior experiences, improve the generic performance metric template
in terms of metrics norms and procedures.

Decision-making steps: alliance evaluation
Step 1: design performance metric system
A systematic approach to performance metrics enables alliance partners to monitor the
alliance’s progress and obtain relevant, timely and frequent information that constructively
improves the alliance’s design and management. In contrast, an unstructured approach will
lead to unreliable, ineffcient performance metrics.The full burden falls on the alliance manager, who may or may not have experience designing metric systems and is likely to be
preoccupied with day-to-day operations.An unstructured approach also misses opportunities
to leverage experience and know-how across the frm, which may beneft its other alliances.
More important, it keeps frms from comparing their performance across alliances and, thus,
from engaging in active alliance portfolio management.
To overcome these issues, frms should adopt a structured approach to performance metrics, including an alliance scorecard template and illustrative metrics.The template should be
repeatable, proactive and open to sharing because predetermined metric types allow frms
to tailor their metrics to an alliance while still retaining the possibility of comparing performance across partnerships. In addition, guidelines regarding which metrics are most appropriate in different alliance settings are invaluable to alliance managers. Even though standardized
performance metric systems require ex-ante investments, the benefts, in terms of benchmarking and learning across alliances, are likely to outweigh the costs.
Building on the performance metric template, the frm can transform its alliance approach
into clear, measurable alliance goals and then match performance metrics to them. For
example, if a frm aims to realize fnancial objectives, its performance metric system should
incorporate fnancial metrics, which may include proftability, costs, revenues and returns on
investment. If a frm seeks to realize learning objectives, the metric system may contain learning metrics, including output-oriented metrics, such as acquired market know-how, management competences and technological expertise; process-oriented metrics, such as the partner’s
learning ability and knowledge transfer; and prospective metrics, such as R&D spending.

Alliance evaluation
119
In addition, a frm should consider other unique alliance characteristics. Learning alliances
with exploration objectives tend to achieve superior performance according to learning and
relational metrics; business alliances with exploitation objectives, on the other hand, require
fnancial and strategic metrics. Equity-based governance forms often build fnancial metrics
into their very design so as to achieve government approval and meet accounting laws and
regulations. However, such regulations do not apply to non-equity-based governance forms,
so partner frms in such alliances should build similar metrics into their systems.

Step 2: implement performance metric system
After having developed a tailored performance metric system, the frm should make several
decisions in preparation for the implementation step. First, for each type of metric, it should
determine the appropriate nature of the metric, and for each indicator, it should make a
decision about whether prospective, outcome, process, quantitative or qualitative metrics are
preferable. Financial metrics are quantitative in nature and best captured with indicators,
such as proftability, that may be part of the frm’s accounting system. Relational metrics are
subjective in nature and therefore captured with qualitative metrics. For example, perceptual
judgements might reveal the degree to which partners trust each other or behave dishonestly
and opportunistically. Strategic and learning metrics might be assessed using both quantitative
(e.g. market share) and qualitative (e.g. competitive strength) metrics.
Second, procedural decisions involve the frequency of assessment, communication and
decision-making authority. Although a performance metric system is preferably comprehensive, partner frms may decide to use single indicators to keep the metric system manageable.
That is, multiple metrics may create information overload, which hampers effective decision making. Partner frms also need to decide whether to align their metrics and engage
in joint efforts to monitor the alliance, or to implement individual metric systems. Sharing
information about metric assessment reduces the magnitude and nature of conficts because
partners engage in mutual sense making. However, individual metric systems may provide
more necessary information regarding how to steer the alliance towards the frm’s individual
objectives. Alliance partners must also decide on the frequency of the evaluation; they might
conduct individual assessments once per month but undertake joint assessments on a quarterly basis. Such procedural decisions thus reinforce a comprehensive performance metric
system because they stimulate joint sense making, create transparency and signal a willingness
to work together in the alliance.
Third, the sources of data must be determined. In many cases, data required for fnancial,
strategic and operational metrics can be retrieved from extant systems, including project
management tools and customer relationship systems owned by one partner or the other. If
necessary, partners should modify their individual systems and/or build new joint systems
to provide the necessary information for assessing the alliance. A questionnaire also might
be circulated periodically to all staff involved in the alliance. Learning and relational metrics
have a subjective element; the outcomes and processes captured may not be apparent immediately.To address this problem, staff members involved in the alliance might compile qualitative, narrative reports, preferably supplemented by quantitative metrics, although the focus is
on linking outcomes directly to inputs. Checking survey and qualitative reports at different
time intervals provides a proxy for whether and to what degree outcomes and processes meet
their targets.

120
Alliance evaluation
Step 3: interpret metric outcomes
During the third step, the data obtained should be processed and interpreted.After applying the
metrics to an alliance, partner frms can write a report with all relevant information that contains
multiple sections with different information for the various stakeholders.Top executives require
aggregated information to assess the value of the alliance; operational staff need detailed information to optimize the alliance design and management.The use of reports in combination with
a structured agenda and decision-making tools ensures that the information is used adequately
to support dialogue, collective sense making and decisions about what to do. It is the responsibility of alliance managers (from both partners) to organize meetings and prepare the metric report.
Using the metric report and progress meetings, these managers can arrive at decisions about
corrective measures.A broad range of responses and adaptations is possible, but they consist of
three generic types: continue without intervention, continue with intervention and terminate
the alliance. If only minimal discrepancies between expectations and actual outcomes emerge,
alliance management may decide to continue the alliance in a similar fashion. In contrast, a
greater discrepancy between expected and realized proftability may trigger renegotiations
about the distribution of costs and revenues; an indication of partner distrust could trigger
initiatives to change the management style from task focused to problem solving. If discrepancies between expectations and realized outcomes become substantial and span multiple metrics, alliance partners could decide to terminate the relationship. For example, if the alliance
under-performs economically and the partners distrust each other, the preferred alternative
may be termination.To anticipate these critical decisions, the alliance manager may explicate
the implications of performance discrepancies ex ante, using the following guiding questions:
•
•
•
•
What actions will be initiated if the alliance under-performs on some metrics but overperforms on others?
Is there a minimum level of required performance on certain metrics, regardless of performance on other metrics?
What conditions will result in the decision to terminate the alliance rather than initiating
alliance adaptations (e.g. shift in alliance objectives)?
If the alliance fulfls its objectives, what actions will be initiated?

Step 4: assess performance metric system
Conversations about the effciency and effectiveness of the performance metric system are
integral to the use of performance metrics, and if necessary, the metric system should be
adapted to new circumstances. As an alliance progresses, new objectives may emerge, and
assessments of the metric system could indicate the need to incorporate new metrics. Furthermore, based on the frm’s experiences, the generic performance template might be improved
with the addition of new or reformulated metrics and new reference targets.The procedures
surrounding performance metrics also could be altered, such as by changing their frequency
and improving the reporting format.

Summary
The ability of an organization to measure the health of its alliances through consistent and
appropriate performance assessments is an important predictor of alliance success. Alliances
Alliance evaluation
121
that thrive tend to assess their performance using a balanced performance metric system that
includes fnancial, strategic, operational, learning, relational and responsibility measures and
that features milestones that partners can easily evaluate and track to intervene immediately if
performance does not live up to expectations. Systematic monitoring also comprises outcome
and process metrics that enable alliance managers to monitor alliance progress systematically
and retrieve relevant, reliable and timely information to inform decision making.The incorporation of prospective indicators allows for ongoing monitoring and enables timely interventions over the alliance’s progress. Although alliance performance, the value it generates
and the direct and indirect benefts for individual partners are diffcult to capture, balanced
performance metrics systems can help alliance managers articulate, explicate and quantify
objectives. Especially in situations in which goals vary among the alliance partners, developing and implementing a balanced performance metric system jointly deals preemptively with
potential conficts over alliance progress and outcomes. Armed with a performance metric
system, partners can decide whether to continue the relationship and which adaptations to
make, or else choose to terminate the relationship.

CASE: DBS SINGAPORE1
Singapore-based DBS was established in 1968. DBS wants to help its customers to ‘Live
More, Bank Less’. DBS believes that banking should be simple and effortless so that customers can spend more time with the people and things that they care about. DBS aims to be ‘a
different kind of bank for a different kind of world’. Since its inception, DBS has undertaken
multiple initiatives to realize the bank’s ambitions.
Between 1980–2000, DBS diversifed its geographical and product portfolio. The bank
launched autosave in Singapore, opened a branch in Taiwan, established a representative
offce in Jakarta (Indonesia), formed a formal bank branch in India, took lead of a consortium
of local banks to exploit Singtel IP, acquired POSB (another Singapore bank) and launched
internet banking. Between 2002 and 2010, DBS further strengthened their position in Asia.
DBS acquired a 100 per cent interest in Dao Heng Bank, launched CaptaMall Trust, incorporated a fully owned local subsidiary in China, launched an industry-frst banking package
for social enterprises in Singapore, celebrated their 40th anniversary with a project to help
the children in Asia, launched a ‘money safe’ guarantee for customers worried about transacting over the internet and showed their continued support for social entrepreneurship by
launching their fagship community programme, ‘DBS Social Enterprise Experience’.
More recently, DBS expressed an ambition to become the world’s best bank. In support
of this aspiration, DBS launched a new foundation to cement their commitment to social
enterprises; implemented a digital transformation agenda to become the best digital bank;
launched a full-service digital exchange to support fundraising; launched Digibank India, providing the frst mobile-only, paperless, signatureless and branchless bank; and co-launched
the Climate Impact X (CIX) initiative—an API-platform for developing solutions that will bring
more convenience and value to customers and the planet. In other words, to deliver on their
promise, DBS reimagined banking, refusing to be bounded by conventional notions of what
a bank should be. DBS is guided by a responsibility towards society and the planet.
Enacting this responsibility, among other initiatives, DBS forged multiple alliances in
2022. DBS has inked a partnership with Sandbox to extend its banking experience into
122
Alliance evaluation
the metaverse. The metaverse experience will be an additional engagement platform for
customers visiting the Sandbox. The project consists of a virtual world that is being named
DBS BetterWorld, which will be freely available to all members of the public, even to noncustomers. In the words, of Sandbox co-founder Sebastien Borget:
We welcome DBS to The Sandbox as the frst bank in Singapore to step into the open
metaverse and join our efforts to create the SingaporeVerse, a neighbourhood on our
virtual map that will bring the culture of Singapore to life in the metaverse in a very
engaging, equitable, inclusive way that is open to all.
Interestingly, Sandbox forged multiple partnerships with fnancial institutions. In 2022,
Standard Chartered bank also teamed up with The Sandbox to create its frst metaverse
experience. Expanding its offer to (social) enterprises, DBS launched fve new platform
partnerships featuring the integration of digital and supply-chain capabilities, which are
expected to beneft 15,000 small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Asia. Participating SMEs
will beneft from the digital platforms as it will provide them with access to e-commerce,
logistics and commodities, amongst others. Reinforcing its societal responsibility aspiration, DBS bank established a partnership with Terrascope. Terrascope is a smart carbon
measurement and management platform. By bringing together the ecosystem of real economy stakeholders, fnancial institutions, reporting platforms and sustainability consultants
around a common software platform, Terrascope enables the collaboration between internal teams and external expertise needed for enterprises to translate high-level targets into
specifc decarbonization action plans.
Together, the partners aim at timely and accurate carbon emissions measurement and
management to better assess the bankability of clients and accelerate sustainable fnancing
fows in Singapore and other markets in which DBS Bank operates. As stated by Yulanda
Chung (Head of Sustainability at Institutional Banking Group, DBS Bank):
DBS is committed to achieving scale without compromising the integrity of sustainable fnance. Terrascope will help our customers gain a more accurate and comprehensive picture of their carbon footprint, and enable DBS to provide fnancing to advance
their decarbonisation journeys.
DBS also forged a partnership with the National Environment Agency (NEA), a project
named the ‘Hungry for Change Challenge’, which is a nationwide zero food waste challenge to inspire and empower youth from Institutes of Higher Learning. As food waste is one
of the huge waste streams in Singapore, accounting for about 12 per cent of the total waste
generated in Singapore, the aim of this partnership is to leverage the creativity and energy
of Singapore’s youth, aiming to engage students in a nationwide competition to ideate,
develop and implement impactful solutions to reduce food waste while developing their
environmental leadership capabilities. In the words of Karen Ngui (Group Head of Strategic
Marketing and Communications at DBS, and Board Member of DBS Foundation):
Empowering youth and providing opportunities to develop and implement innovative zero food waste solutions is a powerful way to promote sustainability in
everyday living. We look forward to partnering NEA and creating greater impact
Alliance evaluation
123
together in this multi-year programme. It is a privilege to support the next generation in efforts to accelerate and help achieve Singapore’s ambition to be a Zero Waste
Nation by 2030.

Questions
1
2
3
Considering the DBS strategy, what would be appropriate indicators to measure the
performance of all alliance arrangements?
Considering the four alliance arrangements separately, what would be appropriate
indicators to measure alliance performance?
Based on the selected indicators, what would an alliance performance dashboard look
like, and what interventions could be considered to improve alliance success?

Note
1 Business Times (2022); Cryptoslate (2022); DBS (2022a, 2022b); Globenewswire (2022b); NEA
(2022); SBR (2022).

9
ALLIANCE TERMINATION
Because alliance termination is an intrinsic part of the alliance lifecycle, it must be managed
actively.Alliances by defnition are temporary organizational arrangements, which means alliance management should focus not only on their formation and management but also on
their conclusion or termination.Termination creates a complicated burden for alliance managers, who must dismantle fnancial and organizational relationships, recover alliance-specifc
investments, value and redistribute tangible and intangible assets, and safeguard their frm
against damage to its reputation.Yet many managers still get caught off guard by the prospect
of termination and are ill-prepared to deal with the tensions and uncertainties associated with
(premature) alliance dissolution.The objective of the alliance termination stage is to organize
an exit that offers favourable outcomes to all parties, while simultaneously considering the
complexity of the process in terms of key actions and stakeholders, the social and economic
costs, and its speed and ease.To inform decision making about alliance termination, the frst
section suggests that managers should distinguish different types of termination, which enables them to plan the termination during the preceding alliance development stages (shown in
the second section).The following sections provide a systematic framework with a set of four
decision-making steps for alliance termination and a summary before the chapter concludes
with a case illustration.

Alliance termination types, trajectories and motives
An enduring alliance seemingly offers a valid proxy for alliance success, whereas termination
is associated with failure. However, this view of termination ignores common situations,
such as those in which frms form short-term alliances to achieve specifc or immediate
goals and then deliberately end them once the alliances fulfl their purposes or reach a
pre-set date. Of course, alliance failure may also result when alliances do not or cease to
achieve their goals, objectives and/or performance expectations. In this case, alliance termination refers to the dissolution of the relationship because one or more partners withdraws.
Before detailing their trajectories, it therefore is important to elaborate on the varied alliance
termination types.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-9
Alliance termination
125
Types of alliance termination
Many extant studies inaccurately equate alliance termination with failure and alliance longevity with success (Makino et al. 2007; Nemeth and Nippa 2013; Park and Russo 1996).
However, we propose that alliance termination could be considered a success when the relationship is ended intentionally, whereas failure relates to unintended termination.An alliance
termination is intended and occurs because the initial alliance purposes have been achieved,
the aim for which the relationship was established no longer exists, the alliance goals have
been met, or the contract date is due. An unintended termination may come about before
partner frms achieve the initial purposes of the alliance, in which case the performance
expectations have not been met (Reuer and Zollo 2005). Unintended termination also may
occur after the alliance has realized its initial purpose, in the sense that the alliance might have
continued even though it had ceased to produce value (Patzelt and Shepherd 2008).
Alternatively, alliance termination can be defned as a change in structure, such as when partners switch governance modes (i.e. make, buy or ally) or forms (i.e. non-equity or equity-based)
(Makino et al. 2007). Some partners internalize alliance activities and acquire complete control,
such as when one partner takes over a joint venture and turns it into a wholly owned subsidiary.
Other partners divest themselves of alliance activities, perhaps by selling them to their counterpart
or through liquidation (Hennart et al. 1998). Furthermore, frms may seek new alliance partners or
forge new alliances with the same partners. If a frm chooses to take an equity share in its partner, it
turns a non-equity-based arrangement into an equity arrangement. In all these situations, the original agreement ceases to exist, but because frms often adopt alternative strategies to realize their
performance objectives,the alliance termination does not necessarily constitute failure,especially if
the change is in line with the long-term objectives of at least one partner (Peng and Shenkar 2002).

Termination trajectories
Over its trajectory, an alliance termination disconnects former alliance partners by cutting
their active links, resource ties and employee bonds. Their business exchanges also start to
decline with weaker resource ties. However, interactions in terms of communication, coordination and adaptation may intensify temporarily because frms must adjust to the decline in
their exchange activities, as well as negotiating the contract disengagement, proprietary rights
and fnal invoices.These termination discussions often require a great deal of time and considerable adaptations by both parties.The complexity of such disengagement trajectories refects
the status of alliances as strategic and economic arrangements embedded in social relationships; the combination may determine the degree to which partners perceive the termination
process and its outcomes favourably (Giller and Matear 2001).
When an alliance is dissolved at a pre-set date or has fulflled its initial purpose, partners tend
to accommodate each other’s exit.They agree to the end; therefore, the relatively easy termination trajectory should result in favourable termination outcomes.This natural ending integrates
decisions by all parties in the relationship, such that their interests are likely to be taken into
account (Halinen and Tahtinen 2002). Even if the alliance termination is unexpected, partners
may agree to dissolve the relationship, which reduces any adverse impact of potential conficts. Rather, the partners tend to facilitate the disintegration of fnancial and organizational
relationships, as well as the recovery of alliance-specifc investments and the redistribution of
valuable knowledge and resources.The negative impact on the frm’s reputation thus is limited.

126
Alliance termination
In contrast, unilateral, unintended termination tends to create tension and confict.Without mutual involvement, the one-sided decision gets forced onto other parties because the
alliance partners do not share the conviction that ending the relationship is in the best interest
of everyone. Terminating relationships in these conditions may require a lengthy, expensive
process with high risk.The frms involved might be forced to buy out stakes, possibly at a signifcant premium, pay switching fees or expend signifcant amounts to safeguard their interests
and resources. Moreover, a unilateral ending provides the terminating partner with an advantage because it can prepare for its disengagement in advance (e.g. act opportunistically, exploit
alliance-specifc investments) before its counterpart can react. However, such a frm would be
likely to suffer reputation damages, limiting its access to future alliance relationships. Unilateral
exits also impose the risk of confict escalation and may require arbitration by an outside party.
In some cases, partner disagreements about alliance termination resort to litigation. If one
alliance partner violates the alliance contract, the disadvantaged frm may consider a court
battle its best alternative. However, litigation means greatly increased termination costs: hiring
lawyers, consulting with legal experts and paying for other legal and court costs. In addition,
the outcomes of legislative processes are inherently uncertain, and a fnal decision may be
pending for years. Accordingly, many frms turn to voluntary arbitration, using a mediator or
independent third party to resolve their conficts.A mediation procedure offers fexibility and
tends to result in tailored solutions, which are rarely feasible through litigation.The use of an
outside third party suggests that partners agree ex ante to comply with the provided solutions.
Mediation is thus preferable to litigation, for both its time and its cost savings. Mediation
procedures also tend to be confdential, so they have limited adverse impacts on the partners’
reputations, whereas the probability of favourable termination outcomes increases.

BOX 9.1 THE SKOLTECH PROJECT
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has forged partnerships with partners
in countries with repressive governments—including China, Singapore and the United
Arab Emirates—as an attempt to use the power of education to modernize. As part of
this ambition, in 2011, MIT forged a partnership with the Skolkovo Institute of Science
and Technology, also known as the Skoltech project.The main objective of this project
was to help build on the western outskirts of Moscow a multi-billion-dollar version of
Silicon Valley.According to Professor Reif,
The programme sprang from a particular historical moment. In 2011, the
United States was striving to ‘reset’ its Russia relationship.At the same time,
Russia was seeking to establish an innovation-based economy, and MIT
faculty were eager to create new research alliances in areas of shared interest with top colleagues around the world, including Russia, a nation with a
pool of exceptional scientifc talent.
MIT’s work in that direction included extensive efforts at recruiting and sharing students and faculty. In 2019, the agreement was extended with another fve years. This
was because the partnership served positive societal purpose, even though Russian governmental policies were not supported by MIT. In 2022, however, MIT decided to end
Alliance termination
127
this (controversial) decade-long partnership as a protest against the Russian invasion of
Ukraine. MIT made the following statement: ‘We take it with deep regret because of
our great respect for the Russian people and our profound appreciation for the contributions of the many extraordinary Russian colleagues we have worked with’. The
emerging reality led to calls throughout Western higher education to reassess and cut
off ties to Russia and its people.
Source: Basken (2022).

Motives for premature alliance termination
Although an alliance might end upon pre-set contract dates or objective attainment, reports
indicate that 30–90 per cent of alliances are actually dissolved prematurely (Inkpen and
Beamish 1997; Makino et al. 2007; Park and Ungson 1997). A frm remains in an alliance as
long as it perceives the situation as an effcient and equitable organizational form for its purposes (Dan and Zondag 2016). On the one hand, a frm may end an alliance when it creates
insuffcient value because the frm perceives that it could appropriate more value through an
alternative arrangement form. On the other hand, performance differentials between alliance
partners could lead a frm to end an alliance when it is not appropriating a fair share of the
created value relative to its contribution. In general then, the reasons for premature alliance
termination consist of three sets of factors: (1) structural defciencies, (2) process defciencies
and (3) (unforeseen) external circumstances.
During the alliance formation stage, frms establish alliances to achieve their objectives, select
a partner, engage in negotiation and formalize the initial alliance design.A frm may have selected
a partner with poor ft, which increases the probability of opportunistic behaviour, knowledge
spillovers and goal conficts (Douma et al. 2000), which then foster alliance instability and eventually dissolution. Park and Russo (1996) fnd that alliances between direct competitors are
more likely to fail. Distributive alliance negotiations also increase the risk of dissolution because
frms impose unrealistic demands on their counterparts (Rao and Schmidt 1998), and even if
such negotiations reach a satisfactory conclusion, they tend to reduce long-term commitment.
The alliance structure might offer insuffcient coordination or protection against exchange
hazards, which also increases the risk of premature alliance termination. For example, unfavourable termination outcomes are more likely if research alliances, which require strong protection
against knowledge leakage, are governed by a non-equity arrangement (Reuer and Zollo 2005).
During the execution stages, parties need to focus on managing alliance processes, such that
neglecting to invest in relational and learning processes could undermine alliance continuity.
For example, relational norms reinforced by a high-quality, trust-based working relationship
tend to mitigate the adverse implications of poor economic performance on partners’ inclination to end the relationship (Ariño and de la Torre 1998). In addition, alliance studies reveal
that learning races by frms that compete to acquire each other’s knowledge (Hamel 1991)
and the convergence of partners’ capabilities over time (Nakamura et al. 1996) both adversely
affect alliance continuity.Thus mismanaging a partner’s learning intentions and outcomes may
trigger premature alliance termination (Doz 1996). Taking an economic-resource perspective, Madhok and colleagues (2015) suggest that as the alliance progresses, resources undergo
transformation, and this transformation generates new adjustment costs, which, depending on
128
Alliance termination
the incentive asymmetry between partners, may cause a change in ownership of resources or
a complete dissolution of the alliance.
Beyond structural and process defciencies, alliance studies have indicated that (unforeseen)
external circumstances can trigger dissolution. Dan and Zondag (2016), for example, report that
perceptions of higher future returns reduces the probability of alliance termination, but they
also demonstrate that the probability of termination is increased by high levels of technological
intensity and high market density during alliance formation. Greve et al. (2013) investigate alliance withdrawal in the global liner shipping industry and report that, controlling for internal
tensions in the alliance, the availability of outside options predicts withdrawal from a relationship; alternative availability reduces the value of an existing arrangement. Changes in the broader
environment, such as shifts in foreign direct investment policies or new technologies, may also
make the alliance obsolete (Makino et al. 2007). According to Kogut (1989), changing partner
rivalry, due to shifts in industry concentration, increases the likelihood of joint venture dissolution.
Changes within the partner frms’ organization can have similar effects (Koza and Lewin 1998).
For example, internal reorganization, changing corporate strategies, new resource needs, a weaker
fnancial position or new members on the board of directors may prompt frms to terminate.
Thus research has identifed a plethora of factors across levels of analysis that might
explain premature alliance termination. (See also Table 9.1 for an overview of theoretical
TABLE 9.1 Theoretical perspectives and alliance termination
Theory
Underlying logic
Rationales for termination
Transaction
cost economics
Alliance formation if transaction
costs are lower compared to other
governance modes.

Unexpected (high) transaction costs,
resulting from coordination problems,
appropriation hazards and opportunism
induce alliance exit.

Organizational
learning
Alliance formation to the end of
knowledge creation, transfer and
exploitation.

Insuffcient learning, learning races,
lack of knowledge creation and
insuffcient knowledge appropriation
induce alliance exit.

Institutional
theory
Alliance formation as a way to gain
legitimacy, often in response to
external pressures.

Lack of internal or external legitimacy
triggers undersupply of resources and
insuffcient management attention,
which bring alliance exit.

Resourcebased view
Alliance formation if joint resource
combinations are likely to generate
superior value.

Partner’s failure to supply resources,
resources becoming obsolete and onesided appropriation of resources induce
alliance exit.

Network
perspective
Alliance formation as a way to
obtain access to a repository of
resources and information.

Misalignment between network
strategy and network position,
unsanctioned acts and lack of value
creation induce alliance exit.

Social
exchange
theory
Alliance continuation depends on
commitment and on the quality of
the relationship.

Conficts between alliance partners
erodes trust and diverts efforts from
critical tasks, which brings alliance exit.

Source:Adapted from Nemeth and Nippa (2013).

Alliance termination
129
perspectives and alliance termination.) We suggest, however, that decisions and (in)action
by alliance managers at various points during the alliance development stages constitute the
main sources. Managers therefore should be advised to prepare a termination trajectory to
prevent costly separations and avoid the risk of losing valuable assets due to opportunistic
advances by partners to appropriate value at the expense of both counterparts and the alliance. Irrespective of the type of ending, a clear and systematic termination plan is required
from the outset.

Planning alliance termination
Although alliance termination is the last stage in the alliance development framework, attention to it should be a priority in the preceding alliance development stages. Such attention
often seems contradictory in the honeymoon stages of the alliance. Enamoured of each other
and what they can do together, new partners rarely consider breaking up (Gulati et al. 2008),
leading them to accept vague terms and conditions and develop a false sense of agreement.
During the alliance design and negotiation stages, alliance managers should instead take some
time to think about the uncertainties that lie ahead and their consequences for the relationship. In addition, as the alliance unfolds, effective evaluations can issue early warnings, provide
suffcient time to initiate corrections and avoid premature dissolution.
During the alliance strategy formulation stage, frms should mark out the path for its
failure (Wittmann 2007). For example, prematurely formed alliances that represent simply
responses to competitors’ actions increase the likelihood of premature dissolution. When
top management sees competitors forging alliances, they may tend to seek out their own
portfolio of alliances, such that the alliance becomes a goal rather than a means to realize
performance objectives. Without alliance prioritization strategies, alliance termination also
becomes more likely. Rather, frms need to prioritize alliances and allocate resources based
on their propensity to contribute to their competitive advantage.The specifc prioritization
(e.g. strategic, tactical, operational) should match the counterpart’s prioritization. Finally,
ambiguous performance expectations can foster premature termination. Without performance targets, it is impossible to determine whether the alliance is creating value or simply
draining resources.
During the alliance partner selection stage, frms begin screening potential partners. Choosing the right partners based on good partner ft is critical for alliance continuity (Douma
et al. 2000), but blind spots that fall outside the primary evaluation criteria may also lead to
premature alliance termination.The identifcation of wasteful and surplus resources and their
impact on alliance development constitute particularly pertinent hazards. For example, when
a frm over-commits its resources to the alliance, managers develop varying perceptions of the
equitable distribution of value because they are likely to count both utilized and unutilized
resources in their calculations, whereas partners view any surplus and wasteful resources as
insignifcant with regard to value. These disparate views on value distribution will increase
alliance instability. More objective refection, or taking the partner’s perspective, may help
managers sharpen their partner selection skills to such an extent that they provide a solid
foundation for the collaborative scheme.
The alliance termination planning in the alliance negotiation and design stages preferably entails a broad set of contingency-based exit provisions in the alliance contract to
support a well-structured exit. Exit provisions pertain to the conditions in which partners
may dissolve the relationship unilaterally, the costs involved in doing so, and the confict
130
Alliance termination
resolution and exit procedures (Gulati et al. 2008). A clear and mutually agreed set of exit
provisions and the ex-post conditions for activating them can help prevent devastating and
opportunistic behaviour, should the alliance need to be terminated. Partners also should
work to make the exit easy rather than imposing legal constraints on counterparts. Gulati
et al. (2008) suggest that symmetric provisions (i.e. no penalties) allow for a smooth exit by
both partners because they both can end the relationship without substantial termination
costs and then attempt to achieve their objectives through alternative means. Such symmetric exit provisions also are comparatively easier to enforce when all partners involved
face substantial termination costs and the alliance is progressing successfully. Another tactic,
the buy-out premium, can trigger frms to continue an alliance until it has realized its initial objectives. However, the stipulation of easy exit provisions for only one partner offers
no rationale for either partner to avoid jeopardizing their joint value creation. Yet such
asymmetric exit provisions may be required if the alliance features dependence asymmetry.
The dependent partner is always more exposed to the negative consequences of alliance
termination than the independent partner, so inhibiting the latter’s exit by imposing an
asymmetrical exit provision provides a safety buffer for the dependent partner. In addition,
exit provisions should detail situations in which one partner breaches the contract. If in
violation, the partner should be penalized accordingly, and specifc contractual elements in
the alliance contract should stipulate procedures and timelines, and guide partners in any
situations in which contract violations are ambiguous. Asymmetric exit provisions should
also apply when a frm ends a relationship because it has changed its corporate strategy. If
partners are engaged in an alliance and their strategies diverge, they may suffer alliance tensions and disrupted collaborative processes. In this situation, termination blockades result
from transition costs. For example, the remaining frm should be compensated if its counterpart unilaterally ends the relationship.
In formulating exit provisions, alliance partners should realize that easy exit provisions
provide fexibility, but this free opportunity to exist also could stimulate opportunistic
behaviour. In unstable relationships that either partner could exit at any time, neither partner is willing to make relationship-specifc investments.Yet challenging exit provisions, even
though they signal long-term commitment and can enhance relationship building, pose the
risk that partners become locked in to an alliance that is no longer providing value. Finally,
irrespective of their nature, exit provisions should be agreed on and embodied in the alliance
contract at the outset. However, even with great detail, no alliance contract can capture all
unforeseen contingencies, so too much time spent formulating a complete contract might be
wasteful or scare away a potential partner. Instead, partners should develop clear consensus
performance metrics, monitor them as the alliance progresses and tie the exit provisions to
these metrics.
In the alliance management stage, the available alliance contract might include alliance
termination provisions—or not. Seldom do alliance managers take part in the preceding negotiations, so they have no insight into the contingencies that led to the specifc
provisions or ownership of the alliance termination provisions. In general, then, alliance
managers should participate early in the alliance formation process so that they gain some
ownership of the alliance agreement and the termination provisions. However, as Gulati
and colleagues (2008) realize, ferce negotiations can damage relational quality among
alliance managers. Instead of active participation, the emphasis should be on involving
these alliance managers through active communication. Then the managers can increase
Alliance termination
131
the likelihood of a smooth exit by investing their time and effort in building relational
norms and capital.When confronted with alliance termination, a good working relationship mitigates confict because partners expect fair, harmonious communication. These
post-formation processes are thus critical for organizing alliance endings with favourable
outcomes.
Through alliance evaluation, frms can prepare for alliance termination in several ways.
Systematic performance evaluations provide information about outcome and process discrepancies, which informs managers about alliance status (Kumar and Nti 1998). A frm
will be well equipped for the future if it remains constantly alert to internal and external
events that might threaten alliance continuity. Attending to less noticeable exit communication strategies, such as reduced contacts and investments, enable the partner to determine the
danger of break up and take actions to repair the relationship. For example, it may proactively
commission legal experts to assess exit provisions or make unilateral investments to demonstrate commitment. A balanced performance metric system enables the frm to anticipate a
partner’s intention to end the relationship, then prepare an adequate response and economize
on termination costs.

Alliance termination: decision-making steps
For the effective management of alliances, managers should know not only how to establish
and maintain alliances but also how to end them. Termination costs demand that alliance
managers carefully plan and execute their alliance exits. Alliances tend to involve intensive,
complex structures that tap the internal organizations of the alliance partners.Their termination therefore requires particular effort and attention from management. Alliance managers
might consider a four-step trajectory for a smooth exit: (1) assessment and initiation, (2)
dyadic communication, (3) disengagement and (4) aftermath (see Figure 9.1).

1
Assess and
initiate dissolution
Assess the performance metrics with a focus on early warning signs: frequent
referral contract, opportunism, outcome discrepancies and so on.
Initiate termination trajectory and inform top management; assess exit
provisions; identify recoverable resources, knowledge and investments; and
assess exit costs and impact on reputation.

2
Promote dyadic
communication
Communicate intention to terminate the alliance to partner, either directly or
indirectly.
Reconciliation is still an alternative, but requires dialogue, negotiation and
changes in partner firms’ behaviours, alliance design or management.

3
Disengage
Select termination strategy: accommodated mediated or litigated exit;
prepare reintegration of alliance activities in own organization.
Quantify, valuate and recover investments, and communicate termination to
internal and external stakeholders to prevent damage to firm’s reputation.

4
Manage
aftermath
Inform broader network about alliance termination.
Evaluate alliance termination trajectory in terms of outcomes and processes;
codify and communicate learning experiences across the organization.

FIGURE 9.1
Decision-making steps: alliance termination
132
Alliance termination
Step 1: assess and initiate dissolution
During the assessment and initiation steps, a partner frm evaluates the alliance, its future and
how it might end.We have previously elaborated on the importance of a balanced performance
metric system because it alerts managers to early warning signs and symptoms associated with
deteriorating relationships. For example, frequent references to alliance contracts, in particular
their exit provisions, signal trouble in the relationship. A metric system also details progress
towards the initial alliance objectives and thus the appropriate course of action for managers.
Because termination is a last resort, managers should assess the conditions creating the current situation and determine whether they might change them. But if the frm perceives the
alliance is not as successful as expected, no longer fts with its long-term objectives, includes
too many differences between the partners, has realized its objectives or has reached its pre-set
ending date, it needs to end. If the termination is unintended, relationship repair through corrective measures could still be viable; however, repeated failed attempts to modify behaviours
imply that the relationship is unsalvageable. In this case, the following steps are necessary:
•
•
•
•
•
•
Inform top management about the intention to end the alliance.
Intensify monitoring (of partner) to explicate and substantiate rationales behind termination intentions.
Organize assessment of (contingency) exit provisions by legal experts. Alliance contracts
often contain several exit provisions, such that a given clause gets activated in specifc
situations.Which exit provisions apply to the current situation, and what are its implications in terms of property rights, penalties and so forth?
Obtain an overview of resources deployed in the alliance and the degree to which they
are recoverable.
Assess the impact of the alliance termination on the internal organization, including
required organizational adaptations, transfer of staff and reputation.
Prepare strategic analyses to organize alliance activities through alternative arrangements,
including internalization, merger and acquisition, market exchange or new alliance
partners.

Step 2: promote dyadic communication
During the dyadic communication step, a frm communicates the intention to terminate the
alliance to the partner. Depending on the quality of the working relationship and the alliance infrastructure, a partner may communicate directly or indirectly. In a disguised exit, the
frm hopes to end the alliance but hides its real intentions to coerce the partner into doing
the terminating. For example, it might increase the partner’s costs so much that it is forced to
end the relationship. In a silent exit, the partners achieve an implicit understanding about the
ending. Such exits are advised only if the frm realistically anticipates losing vital resources if
it notifes its partner of its true intentions. However, in a revocable exit, the disengaging frm
notes its willingness to alter its termination decision after a joint discussion. Depending on the
communication style and the quality of the working relationship, partners could reach agreement through communication that repairs the relationship. Finally, a frm may communicate
its intention to exit directly, presented as a fnal and irrevocable decision. If some relational
capital has built up, most frms notify their partners of their intention prior to the actual exit.
At this point, the partners might opt for a chosen termination, in which they agree jointly to
Alliance termination
133
end the alliance, or instead engage in a forced ending, in which one partner imposes its decision on the other.This critical distinction affects the likelihood of confict, although regardless
of how they get there, partners next enter the disengagement stage.

Step 3: disengage
The disengagement step often starts concurrently with the dyadic communication step, and
induces a fundamental transition in the partners’ defnition of the relationship. Resource
exchange and communication start to decline, and ties begin to weaken. Depending on the
quality of the established termination provisions, negotiations may be required to determine
the contract end, fnal invoices, copyrights or intellectual property rights. Disengagement
discussions often require time and considerable adaptations by both parties, though if the
procedures, terms and conditions already have been agreed on, the process is more predictable
and smoother. Some critical issues include the following:
•
•
•
Quantifcation and valuation of unilateral and bilateral alliance-specifc investments, proprietary knowledge and resources and other resource commitments.Tangible assets and
resources are relatively easy to value, but most alliance managers fnd it diffcult to value
the in- and outfow of resources and value from and to counterparts. Alliance managers
should move beyond the boundaries of the alliance to consider the impact on their frms’
other lines of business too.
Preparation to reintegrate resources and alliance activities into the organization. For example, frms may reorganize internal decision making; relocate staff; realign fnancial, human
resources and operational systems; or redistribute released resources and knowledge.
Depending on the disengagement process, the need to communicate to internal and
external stakeholders that the alliance is about to end. Adequate and timely information
is important to limit the possible adverse impact on partner frms’ reputations, which
strike the path for future alliances.

The alliance disengagement step reveals the level of diffculty of ending the relationship. An
uncontested termination suggests the alliance partners do not blame each other but rather
acknowledge changed circumstances or needs as the cause. In contrast, a contested termination
indicates that one partner refuses to dissolve the alliance, despite its counterpart’s desire to do
so. It thus appears that alliance managers can follow one of three disengagement trajectories:
1
2
3
Accommodated exit: the alliance partners agree that termination is in order and emerging issues and conficts, if applicable, are resolved using pre-specifed procedures.
Mediated exit: the alliance partners tend to disagree on alliance termination issues but
can reconcile their conficts. Firms voluntarily submit other conficts to an independent
third party to accelerate the end of the alliance.
Litigated exit: the alliance partners fercely disagree on alliance termination, and conficts
are irreconcilable. Firms, voluntarily or involuntarily, resort to arbitration and litigation
to enforce alliance termination.

Each ending has different implications for alliance termination outcomes and processes.The
complexity, in terms of confict resolution and people involved, increases from accommodated
exit to litigated exit.Thus internal confict procedures specifying the time and management
134
Alliance termination
level needed to resolve conficts are suffcient to guide an accommodated exit, whereas a litigated exit demands more time, energy and resources.The termination costs, both economic
and social, vary from minimal for accommodated exit to moderate and substantial for mediated and litigated exit, respectively. Uncertainty, procrastination and complexity also tend to
increase when alliance partners prefer a litigated exit to mediated and accommodated exits.
However, some circumstances (e.g. persistent conficts, hostility) may make an accommodated
exit impossible and a litigated exit unavoidable.

Step 4: manage aftermath
In the aftermath, all resource and personal ties have been disconnected.The partners need an
ex-post facto account of the relationship break-up to disseminate, both within the frm and
to involved external parties.With this account, the partners can build their alliance capabilities and protect their reputations. Learning from alliance termination, particularly failure, is
very important to frms entering into new alliance negotiations; after a failure, many frms
tend to be conservative and cautious, seeking better protection.They may also be less likely
to trust other parties, or demand more contractual provisions and extensive monitoring. Such
excessive controls can increase protection but also jeopardize an alliance before it begins.
Through network communications, alliance partners can also inform other parties in the
broader network about their efforts, which should reinforce their existing relationships and
attract prospective new partners.Thus ex-partners should consider the consequences of their
break-up.
Careful planning and execution of the termination process should also acknowledge that
termination is not necessarily unavoidable; there are ample opportunities for reconciliation.
Yet as dissolution tends to become the primary process, these opportunities diminish rapidly
over time. For example, initial monitoring of alliance progress focuses on alliance continuation, but once they enter the process of termination, partners are likely to focus on dissimilarities and discrepancies that prompt termination. Moreover, a public announcement makes the
chances of reconciliation and relationship repair slim.

Summary
Unlike extant alliance termination literature that tends to equate termination with alliance
failure, we have presented a more fne-grained view: alliance termination can be intended or
unintended.An intended termination is in order when the alliance has fulflled its initial purpose or reached a pre-set termination date. Unintended termination instead indicates that the
alliance ends before realizing its objectives or is ended long after it ceased to produce value.
In addition, alliance termination may result from structural changes in the alliance governance, such that a plethora of internal defciencies and external contingencies can prompt alliance termination.Termination suggests some erroneous managerial (in)action, so we also have
argued that preparing for alliance termination starts during the alliance strategy formulation
stage and proceeds during subsequent stages. Salient issues that managers need to consider
include type of termination, termination trajectories, termination planning, the necessity for
exit provisions, the importance of relational norms and capital, and continuous monitoring.
To guide alliance managers through the complexities surrounding termination, we presented
a four-step termination trajectory.

Alliance termination
CASE: NOKIA–MICROSOFT
135
1
With the introduction of the iPhone in 2007, a revolution took place in the mobile phone
industry. With a new user interface and the revolutionary approach of creating an ecosystem to support the phone’s functionality through apps, Apple not only took the rest of the
industry by surprise but also set a new standard for competition in the mobile industry.
In particular, Nokia’s leading position in the mobile market, both from a mobile software
perspective (Symbian) and a hardware perspective, was endangered. The company rapidly
lost ground to Apple, and later to Google from a software perspective thanks to Android,
and to Samsung from a hardware perspective.
When Steven Elop, CEO of Nokia, announced the partnership with Microsoft in 2011, it
was believed that this would provide Nokia with the opportunity to become competitive
again and grow as a smartphone manufacturer. However, by 2013—a little over two years
after signing the alliance agreement—the alliance was terminated through the acquisition
of Nokia’s Devices and Services business by Microsoft. According to Steve Ballmer, CEO
of Microsoft, this was ‘a bold step into the future—a win–win for employees, shareholders, and consumers of both companies’. However, since that moment, it has been a tragic
ride for Nokia; many thousands of employees have been laid off, smartphone production
decreased over the years and fnally Microsoft wrote off the entire investment in Nokia in an
impairment charge. Microsoft abandoned the name Nokia, and everything that was left is
being converged in the Microsoft Surface team. The collaboration with Microsoft has been
destructive for a company that reigned over the mobile markets for years.
The Finnish company Nokia was founded in 1865 as a ground wood pulp mill and grew
to become a global corporation with a prominent position in the global telecommunications industry. The company was able to establish its leading position through easy-to-use
phones aimed at individual consumers and businesses. However, the telecommunications
industry changed dramatically in 2007 with the introduction of Apple’s iPhone. The iPhone
revolutionized customer experience and created a market shift. In 2008, Google introduced
its open-source Android operating system, which further disrupted the mobile landscape.
During the late 2000s, Nokia was using its own operating system called ‘Symbian’; however, it lacked the sleek user experience provided by iPhone and was generally regarded
as outdated and old-fashioned. Also Microsoft—which was using Microsoft Mobile platform—was outperformed by the new competitors. Next, Microsoft was taken by surprise
when Apple launched the iPad. Both Nokia and Microsoft saw their market shares decreasing steadily, losing it to their new competitors, which outclassed both companies. Both
companies realized that this situation could not be sustained for a prolonged period of time.
After the introduction of the iPhone and Android, Nokia began focusing on revitalizing its
mobile business. In August 2009, Nokia and Microsoft announced their frst step of a strategic partnership by ensuring the porting of Microsoft Offce Mobile and Offce Communicator to Nokia’s Symbian devices (Smart Phones) initially, and then to Nokia’s Series 40 devices
(Feature Phones). This was followed by a vast array of other Microsoft Offce products. The
key Microsoft executive sponsor for this initiative was Stephen Elop, then president of Microsoft’s business division. In February 2010, Nokia partnered with Intel to develop an entirely
new Linux-based platform called MeeGo. This partnership produced the Nokia N9, which
used MeeGo as its operating system. However, it took more than two years to develop the
Nokia N9, by which time iOS and Android had already secured dominant market positions.

136
Alliance termination
In early 2011, Nokia’s new CEO Stephen Elop delivered a ‘burning platform’ speech to the
Nokia employees in which he illustrated that the industry landscape had changed. Instead
of device-based competition, the standard had become an ecosystem-based competition. In
this, business ecosystems—constellations of hardware and software providers, application
developers, social platform partners, etc.—drive industry competition and dynamics. This
speech paved the way for the alliance with Microsoft.
Microsoft was looking for ways to re-enter the mobile market. It had developed a new
operating system, Windows Phone 7, that had been received reasonably well by critics in
2010, but Microsoft’s challenge was to close the gap with its competitors. Although Microsoft forged distribution deals with LG, Samsung and Sony Ericsson, it required a major manufacturer to further commoditize its operating system.
On 11 February 2011, Nokia and Microsoft announced a strategic (contractual) partnership. The main objective of this partnership was to develop a new global mobile ecosystem
for smartphones utilizing the Windows platform. This was to be supported by increasing the
manufacturing power of Windows smartphones based on the manufacturing capabilities of
Nokia. Instead of the Apple strategy of having a single device strategy (the iPhone), Microsoft opted for a strategy in which the Microsoft platform would be available on numerous
phones. Therefore, the enlargement of the product portfolio and increased global availability were specifc objectives of the alliance.
In April 2011, Nokia and Microsoft signed a defnitive agreement. Nokia and Microsoft
agreed to exploit their complementary assets to design, develop and market productivity
solutions for mobile devices for professionals. Nokia would deliver mapping, navigation and
certain location-based services to the Windows Phone system. It would build innovation on
top of the Windows Phone platform in areas such as imaging, while also contributing expertise on hardware design and language support, and helping to drive the development of the
Windows Phone platform. Microsoft would provide Bing search services across the Nokia
device portfolio, as well as contributing strength in productivity, advertising, gaming, social
media and a variety of other services. The combination of navigation with advertising and
search functions offered opportunities to improve customer value propositions. Through
joint developing and the active sourcing of applications, Nokia and Microsoft intended to
increase the number of applications. Also, the partners agreed to open a new Nokia-branded
global application store that would leverage the Windows Marketplace infrastructure. Nokia
was expected to contribute its operator billing system expertise to allow participants of the
Windows Phone ecosystem to take advantage of Nokia’s billing agreements with numerous
operators in more than 30 markets worldwide.
The partnership agreement also contained multiple contractual provisions regarding
the fnancial pay-off. Microsoft would receive a running royalty for the Windows Mobile
platform. This fee took into account the predicted volume of phones and joint collaborative efforts, as well as the engineering work done by both companies, with a minimum
guaranteed yearly base payment. Although Nokia was not granted exclusivity, the provision would allow Nokia to customize the Windows Phone operating system to differentiate
its smartphones from competitor offerings that were also using Windows Phone, such as
Samsung, LG and Sony Ericsson. In return, Microsoft would pay Nokia for its contribution to
the development of the Microsoft platform and other Microsoft services. Microsoft would
also pay Nokia for the right to use its intellectual property, which enabled Nokia to reduce
operating expenses. This was covered in the ‘platform support payment’ of US$250 million
that was paid by Microsoft on a quarterly basis.

Alliance termination
137
The partnership agreement also contained a clause related to the division of tasks and cobranding. The companies also reached agreement on Nokia’s collaboration with Intel. This
would become a long-term open-source project along with Symbian, which would be used
on mid-range Nokia phones. Furthermore, Nokia agreed to restructure its organization into
two distinct business units: Smart Devices and Mobile Phones. Smart Devices includes Windows Phone, Symbian and MeeGo devices, while Mobile Phones concentrated on Nokia’s
feature and lower-end phones.
After the initiation of the partnership, Microsoft organized regular training sessions
and workshops for Nokia engineers and sales employees. Nokia integrated its technological expertise in Windows-operated Lumia series, such as superb camera and
imaging technology. This package persuaded early adopters to buy Microsoft-operated
phones. The ecosystem also grew, and Microsoft reported in December 2013 that
the number of applications available on the Windows phone platform had surpassed
200,000 apps.
However, the collaboration began to show weaknesses. For Nokia, the partnership
with Microsoft was regarded as the company’s lifeline to a prolonged future. Its mobile
business had been decreasing rapidly in the preceding years. To ensure partnership
success, Nokia abandoned its proft-making Symbian platform to focus on the development of the Windows-based platform. Nokia was able to launch ten Lumia smartphones, thereby proving its dedication and earning a leading position in Windows
Phone market shares. For Microsoft, however, the mobile phone business was one of
the focus areas. At the time, Microsoft’s main income was generated by the desktop
operating systems, MS Offce suites, server software and enterprise solutions. As mentioned, the deal with Nokia was not an exclusive deal, and Microsoft also generated
licensing fees from Android smartphone manufacturers. Nokia, anxious to make Windows Phone into a success, became increasingly frustrated with the lack of priority on
Microsoft’s side in terms of, for instance, developing bug fxes for the Windows Phone
platform. Next, Nokia began to work around certain platform issues and differentiate
itself from other Windows Phone manufacturers. Microsoft regarded this behaviour as
not being transparent. Microsoft felt it was not being informed suffciently on product developments progressing within Nokia, which denied Microsoft the opportunity
to tune its software accordingly. Although the number of apps available was climbing, it did not match the level of apps available for iPhone and Android. This situation, combined with the relatively low market share, created diffculties in retaining
and attracting new app developers.
Although Nokia stabilized sales in the lower end of the smartphone market, it had not
been able to achieve a market position in the high end smartphone market. Due to the
premature termination of the proftable Symbian platform, Nokia was now facing fnancial
diffculties. The platform support payments that it received from Microsoft were not suffcient to alleviate the fnancial issues Nokia faced. Nokia, aware of its vulnerable position
as a non-exclusive Microsoft partner, found itself tentatively exploring the development
of Android smartphones to support its fnancial position and increase its bargaining position with Microsoft. However, Microsoft required a stable hardware manufacturer and, on
3 September 2013, announced it would acquire Nokia’s devices and services business for
US$7.22 billion.

138
Alliance termination
Questions
1
2
3
Explain the extent to which formal and relational alliance governance may have facilitated or hampered the partners’ ability to manage alliance termination.
Explain whether alliance termination was avoidable in the Microsoft–Nokia alliance,
and if so, what the partners could have done to prevent alliance termination.
How and to what extent may national cultural diferences between Microsoft and Nokia
have afected this alliance termination trajectory?

Note
1 Blass (2016); Fried (2011); Microsoft News Center (2001); Nokia (2011); PC World (2009);Today in
Windows (2001).

10
SUPPLIER ALLIANCES
In recent decades, the competitive arena of frms has become more dynamic. Markets have
become fragmented, technological developments have undermined frms’ competitive advantage and customer demands are continuously changing.This has pushed frms to compete not
only using their own capabilities, but with their entire supply chain, which has caused a shift
from transaction-based exchanges to supplier alliances. A supplier alliance is a collaborative
arrangement between a buyer and a supplying frm, formed within a supply chain setting, in
which one party (i.e. buyer) transforms the output of another party (i.e. supplier) into end
products.These partnerships, also referred to as purchase, vertical or buyer–supplier alliances,
are forged to achieve long-term results, including enhanced market offer to customers and
reduced channel costs. However, interdependencies between buyers and suppliers increase
in supplier alliances, creating coordination issues and the risk of opportunistic behaviour.
Accordingly, managers are confronted with a unique challenge. By establishing a supplier
alliance instead of conducting a transaction-based exchange, buyers and suppliers sacrifce
independence in order to improve their competitive advantage.This requires from (purchase)
managers that they become aware, learn and adopt alliance management practices to establish
win–win supplier alliances.The frst section discusses this supplier challenge, and the following section elaborates on initiatives that managers can use to deal with it. In the third section,
a supplier alliance is associated with the alliance development framework in order to develop
guidelines for decision making.The chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The supplier alliance challenge
The literature on buyers and suppliers has traditionally considered exchanges between suppliers and manufacturers, wholesalers and retailers, and producers and distributors as discrete
market transactions (Dwyer et al. 1987); in other words, a buyer and a supplier exchange
a commodity in return for a payment. The actual exchange is price-oriented and short in
duration, and negotiations are relatively simple as promises and obligations between the
partners are clear. Because no future problems are anticipated, contractual enforcement is
usually suffcient to govern the exchange, supported by legislation. However, buyer–supplier
exchanges can also be organized through supplier alliances (Grimm et al. 2015; Tan 2001).
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-10
140
Supplier alliances
These are long-term bilateral relationships between buyers and suppliers that aim to create
a collaborative advantage, while also enhancing the parties’ own competitive position (Nair
et al. 2011).The exchange in a supplier alliance tends to be an ongoing process, and outcomes
are more diffcult to specify, as the focus lies on total costs of the relationship rather than
price.Along with operational and logistic characteristics, contracts also focus on more tactical
and strategic elements and encompass behavioural elements. In short, whereas a traditional
buyer–supplier exchange emphasizes sourcing through multiple suppliers, competitive bidding, use of short-term contracts and purchase price and quality, supplier alliances centre on
one preferred supplier, the use of contingency contracts, building relational capital and longterm objectives (see Table 10.1).
From a buyer perspective, supplier alliances can yield signifcant benefts (Lyons et al. 1990).
Supplier alliances reduce a buyer’s uncertainty because forging a preferred supplier relationship secures the continuous supply of critical resources. In addition, supplier alliances may
also prevent competitors from obtaining access to the high-quality resources possessed by the
preferred supplier. Close and intensive contact with suppliers also improves the effectiveness of
R&D, which may result in shortened product development cycles, more innovative products
and higher product quality. In addition, intensive collaboration with a supplier may enhance a
buyer’s reputation as it may evoke positive customer responses.Working with a set of preferred
suppliers also reduces operational coordination costs.When parties have increased knowledge
TABLE 10.1 Two views on buyer–supplier exchanges
Transactional exchange
Supplier alliance
Description
Vertical relationship with a supplier
with a focus on independence and value
appropriation (e.g. costs).

Vertical alliance with a supplier with
a focus on interdependence and value
creation (e.g. learning).

Power
Bargaining power is exercised by buyers
and suppliers to realize individual
outcomes.

Bargaining power is managed by buyers
and suppliers to realize joint outcomes.

Scope
Narrow; exit is easy due to low
termination costs.

Broad; exit is diffcult due to high
termination costs.

Contractual
governance
Contracts have a short duration and
are narrow; contingency provisions and
litigation are means of resolving disputes.

Contracts have long duration and are
broad; broader contingency provisions and
mediation are means of resolving disputes.

Relational
governance
Relational elements are virtually
absent; power and contracts determine
outcomes.

Relational elements mitigate adverse
implications of power asymmetries, and
reduce opportunism and misappropriation.

Knowledge
and
information
Minimal; buyer provides specifcations
and supplier provides technological
capability.

Extensive and broad; exchange of
proprietary information and technological
knowledge; inter-partner learning.

Payment
Fixed price per unit; ex ante known;
payment upon delivery.

Payment based on revenue; ex ante
unknown; payment conditional on success.

Decision
making
Mainly autonomous; focus on protecting
investments and specifcations.

Mainly joint decision making; focus on
division of roles authority.

Sources: Dwyer et al. (1987); Lyons et al. (1990).

Supplier alliances
141
about product specifcations, production schemes and logistical requirements, this reduces a
buyer’s administrative overhead costs. The downside, however, is that supplier alliances can
function as mobility barriers and reduce a buyer’s fexibility because they impose substantial
switching costs on a buyer. If a major supplier terminates the relationship, the effects can be signifcant. Supplier alliances also tend to increase coordination costs in order to deal with diverging objectives and backgrounds. Furthermore, buyers may need to adopt new negotiation
styles, reward systems and management skills if they are to accommodate the shift from discrete
market transactions to supplier alliances; this often requires changes in the internal organization.
Supplier alliances offer suppliers a stable market for their products and/or services. This,
along with their long-term nature, means they enable involved parties to better plan their
workforce, production and R&D, with the possibility of technical, managerial or fnancial
assistance from their buyers. In addition, suppliers can exercise infuence on a buyer’s future
decision making and receive insider access on buying decisions. A supplier can become a
gatekeeper for a buyer’s innovations and may receive and leverage relevant information about
its own competitors. However, a supplier alliance also presents costs and risks to a supplier. For
example, if a supplier’s autonomy decreases, it may involuntarily leak proprietary information,
and its personnel mobility may be reduced. In addition, a buyer may pressure a supplier to
assume full responsibility for design, quality and costs.A supplier alliance also forces a supplier
to become more transparent: for example, the supplier may be required to display cost structures, which undermines the supplier’s bargaining position.
All in all, supplier alliances have the potential to contribute to partners’ (that is, a buyer
and a supplier) competitive positions as they enable the parties to economize on procurement
costs while helping realize their long-term objectives (see Table 10.2), such as innovation and
TABLE 10.2 Examples of supplier alliances
Description
Mercedes-Benz–
Luminar Lidar
In 2022, Mercedes-Benz announced a partnership with Luminar Lidar, which
is focused on the supply of sensors for the use in luxury vehicles. Luminar
Lidar will assist Mercedes-Benz in gathering on-road data to support the
Mercedes ambitions for automated driving.As part of the partnership, the
German car maker also bought a small stake in Luminar Lidar.

Tesla–Panasonic
In 2013, Panasonic corporation and Tesla Motors formalized a supplier
agreement in which Panasonic will expand its supply of automotive-grade
lithium-ion battery cells to Tesla. In 2016, they also decided to collaborate
on the manufacturing and production of photovoltaic cells and modules.
Panasonic operates the Gigafactory in Nevada together with Tesla.

Ernst & Young–
Logility Inc.

In 2022, Ernst & Young (EY) announced an alliance with Logility Inc.
(Logility).The partnership combines Logility’s supply chain planning
solutions with the experience of EY US in process management, programme
governance, change management and delivery framework.Through this
partnership, the partners will have the ability to enhance their supply chain
management, leading to better business outcomes such as increased visibility of
their supply chains, better demand forecasting, cost and process optimization,
sales management, quicker response to market dynamics and improved decision
making.

Sources: Mercedes Benz Group Media (2022); Noel (2022);Tesla (2013, 2016).

142
Supplier alliances
market share. However, managing supplier alliances is more complicated than discrete market
transactions, primarily due to the risks associated with the loss of interdependency, alliancespecifc investments and opportunism. Thus managers of a supplier alliance are confronted
with a unique challenge: in order to realize their objectives, they must collaborate closely with
supply chain partners while simultaneously protecting their frm’s long-term interests. This
requires a fundamental shift in their management approach of buyer–supplier relationships.

Managing supplier alliances
Various organizational theories, such as transaction cost theory, the resource-based view, the
relational view, resource dependence and social exchange theory, provide explanations for
the design, management and performance of supplier alliances. As previous chapters have
discussed the insights of these theoretical perspectives, this chapter elaborates only on the
issues upon which managers responsible for supplier alliances must focus.These are: (1) interdependency, (2) scope and intensity, (3) alliance governance, (4) alliance-specifc investments
and (5) collective identity.

Interdependency
Traditionally, a buyer uses its bargaining power to infuence the exchange between a buyer
and supplier in order to maximally support its private objectives (Dwyer et al. 1987). However,
when buyers exercise bargaining power in supplier alliances without considering long-term
implications, the alliance is likely to fail, for two reasons. First, in discrete market transactions,
bargaining power can only be exercised until the execution of the transaction. In a supplier
alliance, however, the impact of bargaining power stretches from the time the alliance is
forged until the relationship is ended because the distribution of benefts continues as long
as the partnership progresses. However, excessive and one-sided use of bargaining power
undermines the relational capital between partners, which often leads to an increased focus
on self-interest and opportunistic behaviour. Second, although extant studies have assumed
buyers generally possess a bargaining power advantage, which they use to extract additional
concessions from their suppliers, a strong supplier may also face a large number of small buyers, providing the supplier with a bargaining power advantage (Berthon et al. 2003). If a buyer
uses bargaining power in a supplier’s market, this could lead to retaliation from the supplier
that could potentially damage the buyer’s interests.
Supplier alliances are unique in that they are embedded in the value chain, though the
management implications of mutual dependence and dependency asymmetry are equivalent
to those discussed elsewhere (see Chapters 2 and 13). In brief, higher degrees of mutual
dependence associate positively with collaborative efforts, serving to foster higher levels of
alliance performance (Kumar et al. 1995). More specifcally, within a supplier setting, mutual
dependence is associated with joint coordination, quality of information exchange, use of
non-coercive strategies and less punitive actions. In contrast, dependency asymmetry undermines collaborative efforts and is associated with increases in confict, opportunism, the use
of coercive strategies and unequal appropriation of benefts. This undermines the ability of
a weaker party (either buyer or supplier) to realize its objectives. Parties may attempt to deal
with power through offensive tactics (such as alliance-specifc investments) and defensive
tactics (such as contractual provisions), or they may simply accept a power asymmetry.Thus,
as the interplay between mutual dependency and dependency asymmetry affects alliance
Supplier alliances
143
TABLE 10.3 Managing supplier alliances
Description
Implications
Interdependency
A shift is required from a focus
on autonomy and independence
to managing and accepting
interdependencies.

Mutual dependence reinforces
collaborative efforts; dependence
asymmetry reinforces competitive
efforts, if not curbed.

Scope and
intensity
Scope entails the range of activities
in an alliance, whereas intensity
refers to the degree of involvement
and integration.

A broad scope offers more
opportunities for synergy; narrow
scope limits opportunism; high
involvement enhances information
exchange; low involvement facilitates
easy exit.

Alliance
governance
Pure supplier alliances tend to be
non-equity-based; increasing scope
and intensity favour equity-based
arrangements.

Irrespective of governance form,
contractual provisions (e.g. exclusivity)
and relational capital (e.g. trust) are
critical.

Alliance-specifc
investments
Supplier alliances beneft from
alliance-specifc investments in
assets, personnel and sites.

Trade-off between unilateral and
bilateral investments to reinforce
synergies and curb one-sided
exploitation and opportunism.

Collective
identity
Collective identity between partners
stimulates joint-sense making, social
cohesiveness and performance.

Boundary-spanning agents are critical
in supplier alliances as they function
as creators and protectors of collective
identity.

development (Gulati and Sytch 2007), managers should consider the timing and content of
actions to deal with interdependencies carefully.Table 10.3 provides an overview of how to
manage the unique supplier alliance challenges.

Scope and intensity of the alliance
The scope of a supplier alliance is defned by the range of activities it includes. Although the
focus in a supplier alliance is on purchasing, the agreement may encompass other activities,
such as research and development, production, marketing and sales, and distribution. For
example, an automotive supplier providing specialized parts to a car manufacturer can also be
involved in innovation activities and after-sales services. Despite the tendency to assume that
a larger scope would be preferable to realize a wide-range of synergetic benefts, a relatively
narrow scope (i.e. pure purchasing) can be benefcial in that it limits coordination costs and
the risk of opportunistic behaviour (Zinn and Parasuraman 1997).
The intensity of an alliance is defned as the degree of direct involvement between partners. The number of direct interactions, the number of people collaborating, the size of
investments and joint decision-making structures are all indicators of the intensity of the
alliance. High-intensity alliances have a high number of cross-frm connections, which translates into increased communication and information exchange.This enables suppliers to gain
insights into the objectives and specifc requirements, which can lead to improved customer-
144
Supplier alliances
specifc product and/or service delivery and collaboration that improves overall supply chain
performance. However, a higher level of intensity also makes it increasingly diffcult for partners to terminate the supplier alliance due to higher switching costs.

Alliance governance
Transactional supplier alliances, typically used for commodity items (e.g. limited scope and
intensity), tend to be organized through non-equity-based arrangements (Dwyer et al. 1987).
Firms then depend on multiple specialized suppliers, reducing incentives to adopt equitybased governance forms. For example, Jaguar Land Rover engaged in more than £2 billion
worth of supply contracts to more than 40 key strategic partners to develop its new car
model: Evoque. As the scope of a supplier alliance increases, partners may prefer an equitybased arrangement to impose control, secure property rights and obtain long-term benefts.
For example, EVO Electric, a pioneer in advanced electric drive solutions for the automotive sector, forged a joint venture with GKN, the world’s leading supplier of automotive
driveline systems and solutions. The joint venture manufactures and sells drive systems for
use in hybrid and all-electric vehicles. Whereas EVO Electric supplies advanced electric
drive technology and associated vehicle integration expertise, GKN invested £5m in cash
and provides engineering and commercial resources for the development of EVO Electric
and the joint venture.
Irrespective of the governance form, contractual and relational governance are critical
to supplier alliances to enforce coordination and exploit learning effects. To protect against
exchange hazards, buyers and suppliers employ alliance contracts that contain clauses related
to matters such as product specifcations, exclusivity, fnancial contributions, specialized investments and logistics. Alliance contracts allow parties to protect themselves against misuse of
bargaining power and opportunistic behaviour, as contracts are intended to steer partners’
behaviour towards collaboration. However, relational governance (i.e. relational norms and
capital) tends to be more effective in supplier alliances because they avoid contracting costs
and are better able to anticipate potential opportunistic behaviour. For example, the buyer’s
dependence and the supplier’s opportunism are positively related under low relational norms
and inversely related under high relational norms (Joshi and Arnold 1997). Self-enforcement
also enables value-creation initiatives, including the sharing of fne-grained tacit knowledge,
exchange of resources that are diffcult to price, increased responsiveness and participation in
innovations.
In terms of management control, assigning joint decision-making authority is critical.
Because supplier alliances are often forged in dynamic industry settings, agility and responsiveness within the supply chain demands quick decision making. In addition, supplier
alliances beneft from the establishment of cross-functional teams (Lyons et al. 1990)
because such teams coordinate development and improvement across functional areas and
are instrumental in the coordination and integration between a buyer and supplier. In terms
of monitoring, parties may install a balanced performance metric system that captures a
wide range of output indicators (e.g. price and total cost), process indicators (e.g. logistics)
and behavioural indicators (e.g. acting in accordance with standard operating procedures).
However, whereas output monitoring decreases partner opportunism in supplier alliances,
behaviour monitoring—a more obtrusive form of control—actually increases partner
opportunism (Heide et al. 2007).

Supplier alliances
145
Alliance-specifc investments
Productivity gains in a supplier alliance are possible when partners are willing to make
alliance-specifc investments and combine resources in unique ways (Dyer 1996). Bilateral
alliance-specifc investments function as a mutual hostage that prompts partners to exploit a
collaborative advantage (Jap 1999) as parties voluntarily create and accept mutual dependence.
For example, partners might engage in performance improvement programmes, requiring parties to make alliance-specifc investments in process, technology and personnel.This translates
to increased transparency between parties and a better ability to provide customer-specifc
performance. For example, manufacturers and suppliers often work together to accommodate
stringent just-in-time logistical demands, and specialized technological interfacing ensures
the distribution of planning information and forecasts.Within the automotive industry, part
suppliers often make physical investments, such as locating their factories in close proximity to
an automotive manufacturer.Thus, partners in a supplier alliance tend to beneft from tailored
investments in assets, personnel and sites.
When one party makes alliance-specifc investments in a supplier alliance, it loses some of
its bargaining power and may fall victim to opportunistic behaviour by the other party (Klein
et al. 1978).Alliance-specifc investments cause switching costs to increase, which reduces the
likelihood that the relationship might be ended by the party that has to incur those costs (a
hold-up situation). For example, suppliers’ transaction-specifc investments in the physical
assets and production facilities jeopardize relationship performance due to hold-up behaviour
of the manufacturers (Gurcaylilar-Yenidogan and Windsperger 2014). In an adversarial context, parties make unilateral investments to enhance their own competence selfshly, which
usually has a detrimental effect on the relationship (Nair et al. 2011). However, unilateral
investments may also signal commitment to maintaining the relationship (Gulati et al. 1994)
as they rebalance a dependence asymmetry by voluntarily creating a hostage situation. For
example, Jap and Ganesan (2000) fnd that, whereas alliance-specifc investments made by a
buyer infuence its perceptions of supplier commitment negatively, specialized investments
by a supplier increase the buyer’s perception of supplier commitment. Ebers and Semrau
(2015) report that buyers or suppliers are more likely to make unilateral specifc investments
when they can realize positive economic spillover values for other transactions with the same
exchange partner as well as for third-party transactions.Thus, buyers and suppliers may expand
or limit their degree of alliance-specifc investments in order to create favourable exchange
conditions.To avoid the adverse implications of potential hold-up situations, alliance partners
may install monitoring systems, enforce relational governance and invest in goal congruence.

Collective identity
Creating a collective identity within a supplier alliance can help stimulate alliance performance (Ireland and Webb 2007).A strong collective identity among representatives of buyers
and suppliers tends to reduce conficts.The presence of a collective identity suggests that individuals reduce ambiguity and promote self-enhancement and that partners share goals, visions
and working principles. Collective identity creates social cohesion amongst the team members and leads to greater cooperation within the supplier alliance. A higher level of shared
identity in supplier alliances allows for increased transparency and knowledge sharing, which
results in improved performance, thereby increasing trust.This facilitates further development
146
Supplier alliances
BOX 10.1 GLOBAL SUPPLY CHAINS
The COVID pandemic exposed the vulnerabilities in global supply chains. Trade restrictions and massive shortages of medical supplies, chips, cloths, toys and other products
highlighted the weakness of a globalized world. Ninety-four percent of Fortune 1000
companies have experienced supply-chain disruptions from the pandemic, with threefourths of them reporting negative or strongly negative impacts on their businesses.
Manufacturers are under pressure to become more resilient against external shocks
and eliminate their dependence on critical (re)sources. Supply chain partners need to
reconsider their (lean) manufacturing and supply strategies. In today’s age, frms cannot
operate autonomously. Automakers aren’t equipped to create touchscreen displays or
the countless microprocessors that control the engine, steering and functions such as
power windows and lighting. Dependence on niche specialists in a value chain ofers
fexibility, customization and enhanced oferings but also exposes supply chain partners
to vulnerabilities. Production and supply come to a stop when one (niche) supplier is
unable to deliver. Firms need to map the full supply chain, including frst, second and
third tiers to identify and mitigate supply risks. Mitigation can be done by reducing
dependence on medium- or high-risk supply partners via adding more sources in more
globally dispersed locations. Or by installing safety stocks (i.e. extra inventory) within
the global supply chain. Or by pushing process innovations across the value chain (e.g.
digitization, reconfguration, new process technologies and additive manufacturing).
Amongst others, these resolutions will boost supply chain resilience against disruptions.
Sources:Accenture (2022); Panwar et al. (2022); Shih (2020).

of the relationship because frms will feel an intrinsic responsibility to contribute to the
well-being of the group. To this end, boundary-spanning agents are critical for the creation
of a collective identity. Close interaction between representatives from each party enhances
information exchange related to buyers’ and suppliers’ motivations, strategic direction and
supporting visions. Boundary-spanning agents are especially valuable in dynamic situations,
which are characterized by a high degree of uncertainty because they allow for faster decision making and act as a network broker within their organizations, allowing the partnership
to prosper effectively from the knowledge base and the competences that frms possess.With
a collective identity, a supplier alliance may also become a competitive entity in which collaboration is supported, potentially extending beyond the alliance to the entire supply chain.

Supplier alliances: decision-making steps
The increased focus on core competences and greater reliance on more fexible structures
has led to suppliers playing a greater role and has changed how suppliers are managed. The
emphasis shifts from market transactions to strategic supplier alliances.The key advantages of
supplier alliances compared to transaction-oriented exchanges is that they reduce transaction
costs; they encourage coordination and communication, which translates into lower manufacturing and labour costs and improved quality, improved predictability and supply assurance;
Supplier alliances
147
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Assess industry and value chain to achieve insights into buyer’s and
supplier’s markets.
Avoid inclination to obtain autonomous control and/or exercise
bargaining power; center on the long-term benefits of supplier.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Conduct partner fit analysis with focus on financial stability, capacity
constraints, purchase specifications, competences and potential
synergies.
Selecting a supplier requires attention to bargaining power, alliancespecific investments and the type and degree of exchange hazards.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Avoid the tendency to engage in short-term adversarial negotiations;
engage in integrative negotiations.
Extend negotiation agenda with topics as product, quality and
logistical specifications.

4
Alliance
design
Non-equity based arrangements benefit pure supplier alliances;
increasing scope and intensity may demand equity-based arrangements.
Seek balance between contractual (e.g. exclusivity and non-competing
clauses) and relational governance (e.g. trust) and align management
control mechanisms with alliance objectives.

5
Alliance
Launch
During the alliance launch, the launch team should emphasize
collaboration and prevent transaction-based behaviours.
Careful selection of alliance delegates, creating a mixture of account,
procurement and alliance professionals.

6
Alliance
management
FIGURE 10.1
Invest in relational governance and learning to deal with the adverse
implications of detailed contracts and specialized investments.
Appoint boundary-spanning agents; they are responsible for
information exchange and building and maintaining collective identity.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing buyer
and supplier objectives; these may include product quality, pricing,
order cycle logistic efficiency and customer service and retention.

8
Alliance
termination
Termination is probable when alternative suppliers provide a more
competitive offer or buyer acquired internal procurement capability.
Assess the impact of termination on provision of supplies and initiate
trajectory to secure future provision of supplies.

Alliance development framework: supplier alliances
and they engender a long-term perspective that limits opportunism, exploitation and misappropriation. To provide a coherent set of guidelines for establishing successful supplier alliances (from a buyer’s view), decisions at each stage of the alliance development framework are
elaborated on next (see Figure 10.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the alliance strategy formulation stage, frms decide whether a supplier alliance depicts
an appropriate governance mode to procure critical resources. In addition to the generic
148
Supplier alliances
rationales discussed in preceding chapters, such as transaction costs, resource complementarity
and learning, a frm may focus on buyer–supplier dependence in order to decide whether a
supplier alliance is the appropriate governance mode to meet the frm’s objectives:
•
•
•
Internalizing resources and activities (e.g. merger) may appear to be a viable way to
reduce uncertainty and secure continued provision of critical supplies. However, frms
are often unable to obtain a degree of specialization that is similar to that of autonomous suppliers, which is required to exploit learning effects in terms of effciency and
innovation.
Commoditized resources can be easily procured through market transactions. In a situation in which reciprocal effects are limited and synergies are not expected, a market
transaction constitutes a viable option. Buyers (suppliers) use bargaining power to optimize margins at the expense of suppliers (buyers), which yields short-term benefts.
Through an alliance, buyers seek to obtain control over the procurement of supplies
without internalizing potentially unproductive resources and activities. More specifcally,
when a supplier contributes directly to the value-creating potential of a buyer, and the
latter depends on a stable supply to execute its primary processes, a supplier alliance tends
to be a viable option. In these situations (i.e. the presence of a strategic supplier), buyers
and suppliers expect reciprocal effects, such as by exploiting complementary resources.
Buyers (suppliers) make decisions during the subsequent alliance development stages in
order to optimize long-term benefts.

Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection stage, a frm selects a (preferred) supplier with which to establish
a long-term partnership.A buyer should look for a purchasing solution that includes the best
products or services to meet the set requirements at an appropriate price level and in keeping
with the company’s demands for quality, quantity, (speed of) delivery, fexibility and total costs.
In this phase, potential partners consider obligations, benefts and burdens, and trial purchases
may take place. In addition to generic partner ft criteria, specifc questions may help a buyer
to select a supplier:
•
•
•
•
•
•
Financial stability. Is the supplier fnancially healthy? For example, does it have suffcient
working capital to carry out the order, and is it suffciently solvent to endure a downturn
in demand?
Ability to do the job. Is the supplier capable of providing the agreed product or service?
What methods or systems does the supplier use to manage its production process? Is the
supplier’s quality assurance system suffcient?
Capacity constraint. Does the supplier have the capacity to carry out the order?
Clarity of purchase specifcation. Does the supplier fully understand the product specifcations? Misunderstanding in this area can be the greatest cause of delay and extra costs.
Ease of doing business. Is the supplier easy to deal with and approachable if things go
wrong?
Potential synergies. Do the buyer and the suppliers complement or substitute each other
in a manner that could lead to other potentially benefcial synergies? Besides the delivery
of a product or a service, the alliance with a supplier or a buyer might build on these
potential synergies.

Supplier alliances
149
Step 3: alliance negotiation
During the alliance negotiation stage, emphasis is placed on getting the suppliers involved
in planning and understanding the buyer’s long-term goals (e.g. quality and customer retention). However, there may be some initial resistance to alliance negotiations as supplier alliances tend to threaten the independence that buyers and suppliers value highly. Exercising
bargaining power through coercive strategies to enforce a counterpart’s compliance could
be appropriate in a transactional exchange, but it tends to undermine the joint value creation logic of a supplier alliance and may even result in a premature breakdown. Prompted by
purchase experiences, negotiators may be inclined to use bargaining strategies that characterize market transactions and, therefore, do not match the sought-after alliance-type relationship. It is important, however, that short-term adversarial bargaining is supplemented with
mutual-beneft bargaining aimed at realizing long-term super-ordinate goals. A supplier alliance is unlikely to develop successfully without bilateral communication of requirements,
issues, inputs and priorities, all of which contribute to the development of a collective identity. Negotiators should emphasize their mutual long-term interests and commitments in an
open and transparent setting. For example, parties may signal commitment to their channel
partners by employing well-trained personnel, participating in buyers’ or suppliers’ councils,
granting exclusive territories, offering exclusive distribution and investing in alliance-specifc
assets. Non-coercive strategies tend to be more effective.Therefore, accounting for bargaining power differences is critical to achieving favourable individual and joint outcomes during
supplier alliance negotiations.

Step 4: alliance design
The design of a supplier alliance is critical to its success or failure. Effective governance mechanisms have the potential to generate favourable outcomes, not only by lowering transaction
costs but also by infuencing knowledge-sharing activities. Given that supplier alliances often
constitute non-equity arrangements, frms must consider the following factors:
•
•
•
Intensity and scope of the supplier alliance. Suppliers are likely to assume greater responsibilities in supplier alliances, including areas like product design, prototype development, engineering service, manufacturing and assembly. This could lead to an erosion
of in-depth knowledge and experience for the buyer, leaving it exposed to potential
opportunistic behaviour by the supplier. As the scope and intensity increase, additional
coordination and protection is required against exchange hazards.
The degree of contractual and relational governance. Parties must fnd a balance between
contractual and relational governance mechanisms. Decisions related to designing governance mechanisms tend to be infuenced by market characteristics. For example, is the
supplier alliance forged in a buyer’s market or a supplier’s market? In a buyer’s market, suppliers will tend to strive for contract completeness, while in a supplier’s market, buyers will
be inclined to use complete contracts. Depending on the degree of contract completeness,
parties must invest in relational norms and capital if they are to curb opportunism.
The degree of alliance-specifc investments.To curb the adverse implications of dependency asymmetry, parties may commit to bilateral or unilateral alliance-specifc investments (such as assets, personnel and geographical vicinity). Such investments function as a
signal of commitment, as parties voluntarily create and accept a mutual hostage situation.

150
•
Supplier alliances
The degree of management control. Joint decision making, designated representatives
functioning as boundary spanners and the installation of cross-functional and cross-frm
teams enables buyers and suppliers to communicate effectively, exchange relevant knowledge and information and develop working routines.Whereas outcome monitoring enables partners to steer the alliance towards their objectives, behavioural monitoring tends
to increase opportunistic conduct if it is not accompanied by relational governance.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking a supplier alliance view, generic alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain a successful alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be aware of
two points. First, the alliance launch team should pay attention to supplier alliance practices
that have been built prior to the frm entering. As supplier alliances are distinct from traditional purchase exchanges, launch managers should pay specifc attention to team members’
backgrounds as procurement managers tend to approach suppliers differently than alliance
managers. For example, the former tend to resolve adversities through bargaining, whereas
the latter resolve them through dialogue. It is imperative that launch managers advocate a
collaborative, instead of a competitive, climate. Second, contracts are of critical importance in
supplier alliances as they specify the terms of the delivery. It is part of the launch manager’s
job to create operational (e.g. logistic and administrative) clarity and ensure all staff involved
are updated. However, strict adherence to contractual stipulations (and imposing sanctions in
case of non-compliance) during the alliance launch stage may undermine initial initiatives to
jointly learn. That is, launch managers should allow for mistakes and offer opportunities to
repair mistakes.To accomplish these two tasks, it is critical alliance launch managers familiarize themselves with the supplier and the buyer, for example, through joint (product) trainings
and educational programmes.

Step 6: alliance management
Alliance management, in addition to day-to-day operations, should invest in developing a
collective identity and mechanisms that enforce relational governance. Boundary-spanning
representatives play an important role in establishing a shared identity, which is created by
extensive communication and interaction. Furthermore, by investing in relational norms
and relational capital, buyers and suppliers establish higher levels of trust, commitment and
fexibility. Higher levels of relational capital facilitate knowledge sharing and protect against
opportunistic behaviour, enabling the alliance to become increasingly effective and effcient,
possibly leading to increased rewards. Joint sense making takes place using cross-frm communicative structures, which also involve discussion and decisions regarding corrective measures
to resolve outcome and process discrepancies.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
Supplier alliances are set up to reach certain objectives, and alliance evaluation allows for timely
steering of activities or even a decision to terminate the collaborative scheme.As a supplier alliance progresses, the nature of relationship may change. Learning may lead to the development
of competences and other resources, thereby changing the power balance between parties,
which could impact the distribution of benefts.A shifting power balance may undermine the
Supplier alliances
151
day-to-day operations and cause alliance performance to deteriorate. This means that adaptability is an important aspect as internal and external forces can strain the relationship, including increased transaction costs, emerging alternative suppliers and changing organizational
needs. Effective evaluation and communication structures are required in order for parties to
be able to adjust structures with mutual consent.This will refect the dynamic progression of
the alliance and keep the alliance on track to meet its objectives. Indicators that are typical
of supplier alliances include price (per unit), total cost (per unit), product and process quality,
logistical effciency, and customer service and retention.

Step 8: alliance termination
A supplier alliance ends if the supplier no longer has strategic value. This could occur (1)
because other suppliers have the ability to supply the same products or services or (2) because
the buyer has acquired the capability to supply the critical resources for him or herself.
Another reason for termination could be if misconduct by either the supplier or the buyer
caused damage to the reputation of the other party. Since parties work with each other in one
supply chain, their resource provision or usage is likely to be critical for the parties involved.
Therefore, ending the alliance may be caused by a halt in supply or demand.This may require
buyers to fnd other sources of supply. If possible, a buyer may use a fall-back scenario in
which a dual source strategy can be employed that allows another supplier to take over. For a
supplier, the end of an alliance may require it to look for other buyers.

Summary
Increasingly, frms have to be agile in order to respond to continuously changing internal and
external conditions.To this end, transaction-based supplier exchanges characterized by market
transactions are increasingly being replaced by supplier alliances. Supplier alliances secure the
provision of critical resources, and buyers and suppliers use these partnerships to enhance their
competitive positions. Alliances allow buyers and suppliers to realize long-term objectives
such as improved market offerings, reduced supply channel costs and enhanced opportunities to develop and launch innovations. Unlike traditional bargain-driven supplier exchanges,
however, supplier alliances also impose switching costs and reduce fexibility for both suppliers and buyers, and the increased entanglement (that is lock-in) mean that opportunistic
behaviour can have much worse repercussions. In addition to generic alliance guidelines,
managers can steer supplier alliances to success by paying particular attention to the interdependence relationship, the scope and intensity of the supplier alliance, the balance between
contractual and relational governance, the size of alliance-specifc investments and to building
a collective identity.

CASE: NAM–GLT PLUS1
In October 1933, N.V. De Bataafsche Petroleum Maatschappij (now Royal Dutch Shell)
offered the Standard Oil Company of New Jersey (now ExxonMobil) the opportunity to pool
oil exploitation interests in the Netherlands on a 50:50 basis. The offer was accepted in 1938.
However, because of the Second World War, it took until 1947 to formalize the arrangement by forging the Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij (NAM). In 1948, NAM discovered
152
Supplier alliances
natural gas in the Dutch town of Coevorden. Just more than ten years later, NAM discovered
the Groningen natural gas feld near Slochteren, one of the largest on-shore natural gas
felds in the world. That discovery led to the establishment of the so-called Gasgebouw in
1963, the objective of which was to exploit the Groningen gas reserves. Gasgebouw was a
partnership between NAM, the Dutch State Mines NV (now Energie Beheer Nederland BV)
and the newly formed gas marketing and transportation company Gasunie. Twenty-nine
gas locations and six metering stations were developed in the 1960s and 1970s to exploit
the Groningen gas feld.
After 30 years of operation, renovation of the facilities was necessary to ensure compliance with the latest environmental standards and operational requirements. A major and
complex renovation project had to be undertaken while still meeting the Groningen feld’s
contractual production obligations. The competences required to execute the renovation
project were not available within the NAM organization, and contractors (that is, suppliers)
were considered to play an important role. However, instead of engaging in competitive
bidding procedures2 with multiple parties, NAM decided to opt for an integrated entity that
would accept responsibility for execution of the entire project. In so doing, NAM would
reduce governance complexity. Furthermore, due to the strategic value of the Groningen gas
feld and the scope of the programme, NAM also wanted to avoid a ‘hit-and-run’ mentality as
it was important to meet the objectives that had been set for continuous gas production and
costs reductions while executing the renovation. One implication was that ongoing maintenance had to be done by the same party responsible for the renovation, although these activities would be organized in two separate agreements. Another implication was that both the
NAM and its subcontractor would have to make considerable alliance-specifc investments.
The upshot was that a long-term supplier alliance was deemed the most viable option.
Partners were pre-selected based on their experience, size and innovative capacity. NAM
insisted that consortia would be formed if partners were unable to deliver the project alone.
All parties in a consortium had to share liabilities, which stimulated partnership and commitment within the consortium. Three consortia were asked to produce a conceptual design
based on a NAM reference case and functional specifcations. NAM was pleasantly surprised
with the level of innovation in the designs. Based on a functional tender, the consortium
Stork GLT was awarded the contract due to having the best performance on quality, integrated approach and costs.
The Stork GLT consortium consisted of Stork Comprimo, Stork Wescon, Delaval Stork,
Siemens AG and Yokogawa. Stork Comprimo was later taken over by Jacobs, Stork Wescon
was renamed Stork Industry Services and Delaval Stork was taken over by Siemens. The consortium was registered as a separate legal entity. An underlying Heads of Agreement specifed the responsibilities and liabilities of the partners involved. Due to the complementary
nature of the partners and the clear division of tasks, the consortium opted for a structure in
which the fve partners were responsible for their own scope of work. Together, they were
responsible for renovating the Groningen Gas Field and subsequently maintaining it.
The collaboration between NAM and Stork GLT has been very successful. In terms of performance, nearly all of the renovated facilities have been delivered within time and budget
and with zero outstanding items. With the conclusion of the Stork GLT alliance and renovation programme in 2009, NAM initiated a new programme for the continuous maintenance
of the Groningen assets. This programme also entailed a second stage gas compression
project to counter the further declining gas pressures in the Groningen gas feld. Based
Supplier alliances
153
on the experience with Stork GLT, NAM opted for a similar supplier collaboration scheme.
This entailed that NAM again required suppliers to organize in consortia to reduce governance costs. Also, consortia would increase collaboration between the participating companies to further improve the quality and cost of services by providing innovative solutions.
The consortium would be responsible for the engineering, procurement, construction and
maintenance of the Groningen assets. Using a public tender procedure, numerous parties
participated. Through a competitive dialogue procedure, the same consortium was selected
as had previously participated in the Stork GLT consortium. The new consortium was named
GLT-PLUS.
The two main differences between the STORK GLT and the GLT-PLUS alliance are (1) the
type of work and (2) the scope of work. The main assignment of the Stork GLT consortium
was the renovation of the 20 production sites of the Groningen gas feld. During these
projects, the assets were decommissioned by NAM and transferred to the responsibility of
the Stork GLT consortium that renovated the sites. Then the newly renovated sites were
commissioned and transferred back to NAM to resume production. This allowed Stork GLT
to operate in a so-called green feld situation. The GLT-PLUS consortium has a maintenance
responsibility that requires a much closer collaboration on the operational level between
NAM and GLT-PLUS. Sites are not decommissioned and transferred to the consortium. Maintenance needs to be executed in short time frames, while NAM retains the responsibility
for a safe working environment. This approach is referred to as a ‘brown feld’ situation.
Next, the scope of the GLT-PLUS consortium was enlarged. Besides the 20 production sites,
the maintenance responsibility now also entails two underground gas storage facilities, a
tank storage facility, a storage facility for by-products and a pipeline. The second-stage gas
compression programme is also part of the scope of the partnership between NAM and
GLT-PLUS.
To accommodate the new type and scope of work, a layered contract structure was established consisting of four main elements. The frst element is a base agreement that describes
the terms and conditions. This contract remains static over longer periods of time. Attached
to this base agreement are two ‘interface manuals’ that describe how the collaboration
is executed in terms of governance structures, procedures and pricing. The Operational
Interface Manual describes the operational requirements and procedures. This also includes
extensive health, safety and environmental procedures, escalation procedures and so on.
In addition to the Operational Interface Manual, a Commercial Interface Manual describes
tariffs, rates and indexations. The interface manuals have a more dynamic character than
the base agreement and are updated periodically. The fourth level within the set of agreements is the work orders. The contract specifes that all work is executed in accordance to
specifc work orders, which are issued for specifc work scopes. A work order describes a
specifc scope, costs and incentives (if required). In establishing this contractual structure,
both NAM and GLT-PLUS took advantage of the earlier collaboration and were able to build
on previous experience, which allowed for a swift startup.
Given the ‘brown feld’ approach, increased operational interfacing between NAM and
the GLT-PLUS consortium is required, which increases the intensity of the relationship. To
allow for a smooth collaboration, a thoroughly designed mirror-type governance structure
has been put in place, in which representatives of NAM GLT-PLUS participate. In this structure, distinction is made between operations and maintenance. Within NAM, the operational
manager has the execution manager as his or her GLT-PLUS counterpart. For maintenance, a
154
Supplier alliances
similar structure applies in which the maintenance manager of NAM is mirrored by the engineering and modifcations manager of GLT-PLUS. Each of the combinations discusses scope
of work, timing and costs. Due to the nature of the partnership, NAM specifes in functional
terms, while GLT-PLUS performs detailed engineering of the assignment set and thus provides a technical specifcation that meets the functional requirements. NAM has structured
the Groningen assets in various areas. An area team is responsible for each area. In preparation of a work order, the area team is consulted to discuss the scope and timing of the work.
NAM and GLT-PLUS use a ‘trust but verify’ approach. In this approach, emphasis is placed
on transparency. In the Commercial Interface Manual, a tariff structure has been designed
to allow for easy calculation of costs. For a specifc scope of work, NAM and GLT-PLUS can
independently calculate the costs associated with work scope. Partners provide full insight
in their calculations. If required, clarifcations are requested by NAM. Work may only commence after formal approval and release of the work order by NAM. The transparency not
only applies to the partners within GLT-PLUS but also to their subcontractors working on
NAM assets. This translates into high levels of trust and an increased effectiveness of the
partnership. Within GLT-PLUS, work is divided between the partners according to the competencies required. Work division is facilitated by the fact that the participating organizations within GLT-PLUS are complementary to each other.
The procedure of issuing work orders applies to both maintenance and renovation projects. An important project that has been awarded is the expansion of the underground
gas storage facility near the town of Norg. Due to declining pressures in the Groningen Gas
Field, NAM is unable to meet the steep increase in gas demands during wintertime. Therefore underground gas storage facilities are used to store gas during the summer, which can
be used as a fast deployable resource in wintertime. This project was committed in several
stages between 2011–2015 and entailed a total investment of €700 million. The layered
contract structure has allowed NAM to issue this signifcant work order without having to
execute a lengthy tendering procedure to select a professional party to execute the work.
The high levels of professionalism of all parties involved guarantees NAM to meet gas supply
requirements of the Dutch government, also in wintertime.
For both NAM and GLT-PLUS, innovation is important. A well-balanced incentive structure has been designed in order to induce innovative behaviour. Financial benefts from
better-than-expected performance by GLT-PLUS are shared between NAM and GLT-PLUS.
Incentive structures are dynamic and fnalized on Work Order level. During the frst years
of the collaboration, incentives have been put on timely delivery and complete scope delivery. Later, costs and quality were emphasized in the incentive structures. To further induce
collaboration within GLT-PLUS, GLT-PLUS partners decided to position GLT-PLUS as a separate organization, with its own logo, offce building and stationery. People who work for
GLT-PLUS wear GLT-PLUS clothing and feel part of the GLT-PLUS organization. NAM and
GLT-PLUS have been housed in the same offces, although Projects and Maintenance were
physically separated. Currently the whole organization is assembled in one offce building.
Management of the alliance between NAM and GLT-PLUS has been organized in
formal governance structures. On a daily basis, the operations manager and the maintenance
manager of NAM have contact with their counterparts of GLT-PLUS. Performance is formally managed on a monthly basis. Performance and outlooks are discussed on a quarterly
basis by the CEO board, which is the highest level in the NAM/GLT-PLUS governance
structure. In the CEO board, the CEOs of all participating organizations are present, along
with high-ranking offcials of NAM.

Supplier alliances
155
Given the well-designed collaboration and close ties between NAM and GLT-PLUS, future
outlooks are shared proactively so that positive or negative outlooks do not come as a surprise. NAM is currently facing signifcant cut backs in gas production due to falling public
support for gas extraction. Specifcally, the Dutch Government has decided to reduce gas
extraction, and NAM is held accountable for the earthquake damage caused to private infrastructure. This has negative consequences for NAM but also for GLT-PLUS. However, due to
the open sharing of information, GLT-PLUS and NAM were able to analyze consequences
quickly, and the partners within GLT-PLUS have proactively calculated the consequences of
these cut backs. Nonetheless, the future outlook is uncertain.

Questions
1
2
Explain NAM’s motives to forge a supplier alliance instead of using their unique position
to play of multiple suppliers against each other.
Explain the efectiveness of the supplier alliance’s design and management. Also,
explain what would change if the alliance would encompass learning and innovation
objectives.

Notes
1 Interview with senior executives of NAM; Energy Global (2015).
2 Competitive dialogue is a specifc procedure in European public tendering.

11
LEARNING ALLIANCES
In an era characterized by rapid changes and high levels of uncertainty, learning and innovation enable a frm to maintain or improve its competitive advantage. Learning allows a frm to
generate new knowledge about markets, technologies, processes, product and service concepts,
and business models. However, because frms may lack the internal resources they need to sustain their learning to build new competences, they forge alliances to enhance the breadth and
depth of the knowledge available to them, both existing and new. In a learning alliance, two
or more frms enter into a collaborative scheme to generate knowledge by sharing and combining their knowledge bases. However, in a learning alliance a frm also provides access to its
counterpart, enabling the latter to acquire proprietary or valuable knowledge that is not part of
the alliance agreement.Therefore, frms engaged in learning alliances must protect themselves
from unwanted knowledge leakage.This situation presents frms with a specifc challenge: to
strike a balance between learning (i.e. accessing, internalizing and exploiting knowledge), and
knowledge protection.The frst section of this chapter discusses this challenge in detail.The
following sections elaborate on mechanisms that stimulate or hinder learning and knowledge
protection, and associate the governance of learning alliances with the alliance development
framework.The chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The learning alliance challenge
A frm is likely to have one or a combination of three generic motives for establishing a
learning alliance (Kogut 1988). First, the frm may not possess all of the relevant knowledge and competences it needs to realize its objectives. In such a case, alliances function
as learning vehicles that enable the frm to augment its knowledge base with external
knowledge. Second, it can be time-consuming and costly to develop knowledge internally.
Alliances provide frms with fexible and time-effcient arrangements to develop capabilities beyond their inherited ones, cheaply and more quickly. Third, frms may have fallen
into competency traps and lack the ability to develop new knowledge because they have
become preoccupied with exploiting their existing knowledge. In this way, alliances enable
frms to improve their innovative capacity because exposure to different and externally
sourced knowledge enhances their willingness and ability to innovate (Yli-Renko et al.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-11
Learning alliances
157
TABLE 11.1 Examples of learning alliances
Descriptions
Mizuho Financial
Group–Cognizant
In 2016, Mizuho Financial Group, one of the largest fnancial institutions
in the world, and Cognizant, a leading provider of information technology,
consulting and business process outsourcing services, announced a strategic
agreement.As part of the agreement, Cognizant brings together its fnancial
services, consulting and digital technology expertise to design and develop
a blockchain solution for Mizuho’s customers, counterparties and group
companies to exchange and sign sensitive documents in a secure and
transparent manner, resulting in faster, more effcient processing and multiparty verifcation.

Microsoft–Facebook
In 2022, Microsoft announced a partnership with Facebook owner Meta to
enhance Metaverse hardware integrations and unveiled three new Surface
computers.The partners will collaborate to bring Mesh for Microsoft Teams,
the virtual reality overlay for the Microsoft’s workplace messaging platform, to
the Meta Quest virtual reality (VR) headset.

SotaTek–Dvision
Network
In 2022, SotaTek and Dvision Network established a partnership to launch a
mutual Blockchain Project. SotaTek is the leading blockchain development
company in Vietnam. Dvision Network is a multi-chain metaverse platform,
whereby NFT marketplace, meta-space and Meta city are three key platform
pillars.The partners have launched a multi-chain metaverse platform based
on the Ethereum Network and the Binance Smart Chain. SotaTek continues
to support and strengthen the Dvision Network ecosystem by integrating
additional technologies into their platform.

Sources: Fintech Finance (2016); Microsoft (2022c); SotaTek (2022).

2001).Therefore, frms have compelling reasons to engage: inter-frm learning enables them
to augment their (core) competences (see Table 11.1). In this chapter the focus is on bilateral learning alliances, though frms learn and innovate by forging and managing multiple
alliances simultaneously. Consider innovation in alliance portfolios (Chapter 18) and in alliance networks (Chapter 19). Also see Box 11.1 for an illustration on how ‘open innovation’
builds a focal frm’s learning and innovation capacity.
Instead, knowledge protection requires the safeguarding of access to the knowledge a frm
possesses so that partner frms cannot access, acquire, imitate, duplicate, expropriate, appropriate or use that knowledge for their own purposes (Lee et al. 2007). Knowledge protection
can safeguard critical knowledge from involuntarily spillover, which helps the frm sustain its
competitive advantage (Norman 2002).The knowledge protection methods a frm employs
also function as safeguards against opportunistic behaviour by partners (Simonin 1999). However, knowledge protection implies several hazards. For example, explicit knowledge protection policies and procedures are likely to have negative impacts on relationship quality.
If a partner protects (hides) knowledge and information, this suggests an unwillingness to
devote resources to the alliance.This perception could create other barriers to the free fow of
knowledge and information, such as new contractual provisions, which can increase distrust
if partners equate knowledge protection with a greater risk of opportunism. Perhaps even
more important, safeguards against unwanted knowledge spillover tend to impede the alliance
partners’ abilities to learn.

158
Learning alliances
BOX 11.1 OPEN INNOVATION
Open innovation is a term coined by Henry Chesbrough (2003). As in modern times,
boundaries between a frm and its environment have become more permeable—
knowledge can easily transfer inward and outward—open innovation suggests that
frms should identify and exploit external knowledge as well as internal knowledge,
and establish internal and external interfaces, to the end of advancing their innovative
capability. The central idea behind open innovation is that, in a world of widely distributed knowledge, companies cannot aford to rely entirely on their own R&D departments but should instead buy or license knowledge (i.e. patents) from other companies.
Internal inventions not being used should be taken outside the frm, for example,
through licensing, joint ventures or spin-ofs. Open innovation ofers several benefts
to frms, including reduced cost of conducting R&D, improvements in development
productivity, opportunity to build relationships with customers, potential to enhance
market research and potential for creating synergy between internal and external innovations. Proctor and Gamble (P&G) for example embraced and championed open
innovation, as it is their aim ‘to partner with the world’s most innovative minds—from
individual inventors and small businesses, to Fortune 500 companies—to deliver on
the company’s most challenging opportunities’. To this end, P&G forged the ‘Connect
+ Develop’ programme, enabling P&G to engage with innovators and patent-holders
to meet needs across the P&G business: for products, technology, in-store, ecommerce
and the supply chain. In its quest to partner with external resources to drive discontinuous, sustainable innovation and productivity, P&G dedicated a global team working
with prospective alliance partners and shepherding breakthrough innovations through
the company and into market. Despite the plethora of advantages, implementing a
model of open innovation is, however, associated with a number of challenges, including possible knowledge leakage, possibility of revealing intellectual property to a rival,
increased coordination complexity and costs, and difculties associated with developing strategies to identify, align and incentivize external parties in order to maximize the
return from external innovation. For example, open innovation is challenging because
each new external alliance generates multiple new (internal) relationships as crossfunctional teams (e.g. R&D, engineering and marketing) become involved and need
to interface internally and externally. In short, to make open innovation work and
develop a productive innovation process, frms should purposively manage inbound
and outbound knowledge fows across organizational boundaries, using monetary and
non-monetary incentives to commit parties in line with the frm’s business model.
Source: Chesbrough (2003); Proctor and Gamble (2017).

Therefore, frms that engage in a learning alliance are confronted with a unique challenge.
They must design and manage an alliance to enable inter-frm learning, while simultaneously
protecting themselves against the unwanted transfer of valuable knowledge (Bamel et al. 2021;
Kale et al. 2000).When a frm deals successfully with this challenge, it builds a learning alliance
that improves its innovative capacity while also preserving its competitive advantage. However, when a frm is unable to tackle this challenge, its alliance is likely to turn into a learning
race (Hamel 1991) in which partners make continuous, opportunistic efforts to outlearn each
Learning alliances
159
other. Such races are detrimental to alliance continuation because once a party has achieved
its learning objectives, none of the parties has any incentive to maintain the relationship
(Khanna et al. 1998). Therefore, although learning alliances may help a frm absorb critical
knowledge and develop capabilities similar to those of its partner, participation also increases
the probability of the unilateral or disproportionate loss of core competences to the partner.

Managing learning alliances
Managing learning alliances requires frms to understand the mechanisms that facilitate interfrm learning and knowledge protection. Previous literature has emphasized the importance
of (1) relative absorptive capacity, (2) governance form, (3) alliance contracts, (4) relational
capital, (5) knowledge characteristics, (6) knowledge practices and (7) the role that staff
involved in the alliance play in these efforts (see Table 11.2).
TABLE 11.2 Managing learning alliances
Description
Implications
Absorptive
capacity
Set of organizational routines and
processes that enable a frm to assess
and acquire external knowledge;
prerequisite to knowledge transfer
and creation.

Similar and high level of absorptive
capacity enhances learning and reduces
need for knowledge protection;
protection becomes critical if absorptive
capacity is uneven and in alliances
between competitors.

Governance
form
Equity-based arrangements provide
better learning and protection
opportunities, but non-equity-based
governance may be preferred if
relational capital exists.

Conditional on the governance form,
supplemental design decisions are
required, including alliance scope, task
specialization and contractual provisions.

Alliance
contracts
Contractual clauses that stipulate
knowledge transfer and protection are
required, including patents, penalties
and non-disclosure agreements.

Contracts provide protection against
unwanted knowledge spillover, but overreliance on contracts tends to damage
relational capital.

Relational
capital
Infuences partners’ openness and
willingness to exchange knowledge
but also functions as safeguard.

Investing in relational capital is critical as
it facilitates learning and reduces the risk
of learning races and knowledge leakage.

Knowledge
characteristics
Tacit knowledge is often key
motivation for alliance formation, but
higher degrees of tacitness impede
knowledge transfer.

Transfer of tacit knowledge requires
additional measures; if a frm possesses
tacit knowledge, it may need to install
protective measures.

Knowledge
practices
To manage inter-frm learning,
frms need to invest in supportive
organizational routines, control and
coordination mechanisms.

Training, education, communities
of practice, knowledge systems and
incentive and reward systems encourage
learning.

Alliance staff
Persons involved in the alliance
enable learning but also constitute
important protection mechanisms.

Involvement of top management,
alliance managers and alliance employees
is required for knowledge transfer;
personnel also need to be aware of their
role as gatekeepers.

160
Learning alliances
Absorptive capacity
A frm’s absorptive capacity is the organizational routines and processes that enable it to assess
and acquire external knowledge and disseminate it internally (Zahra and George 2002).This
capacity is the result of a prolonged process of investments and knowledge accumulation
within the frm, which makes it a frm characteristic that is shaped incrementally over many
years (Mowery et al. 1996). Absorptive capacity also plays an important role for knowledge
transfers in learning alliances because it constitutes the frm’s ability to recognize the value of
new knowledge, assimilate it and apply it to commercial ends (Cohen and Levinthal 1990).
However, Dyer and Singh (1998) argued that absorptive capacity varies as a function of
the alliance partner.That is, a frm’s ability to absorb knowledge may depend on how much
its pre-alliance knowledge overlaps with that of its partner.At the most elemental level, prior
knowledge might include basic skills or a shared language, as well as knowledge of the most
recent scientifc or technological developments in a feld.Although a certain degree of overlap in basic knowledge does reinforce inter-frm learning because both alliance partners possess a similar ability to absorb knowledge (Lane and Lubatkin 1998), partners with greater
absorptive capacity are likely to learn at a faster pace. Noseleit and De Faria (2013) show that
alliance relationships with external partners in related industries (i.e. knowledge complementarity) are more benefcial to a frm’s internal R&D efforts for producing innovations compared to collaborating with partners in the same industry (i.e. knowledge overlap).Therefore,
frms that perceive the absorptive capacity of their partners as high are more protective of
their knowledge (Norman 2002) because absorptive capacity asymmetry between alliance
partners increases the threat of knowledge leakage (to the partner with a better ability to
absorb knowledge) and learning races (Khanna et al. 1998).This means that awareness of the
extent to which partners possess similar or different abilities to absorb knowledge is critical,
particularly as it informs alliance decision making.
The issue of relative absorptive capacity becomes even more important in learning alliances between competitors (Khanna et al. 1998).The competitive overlap between partners
creates positive and negative incentives to transfer knowledge. High competitive overlap
encourages frms to be more protective about their knowledge because unintended knowledge transfer might endanger their own competitive advantage (Khanna et al. 1998). At
the same time, it also facilitates knowledge transfers because knowledge bases are likely to
resemble one another (Schoenmakers and Duysters 2006), which increases each partner’s
ability to understand, valuate and assimilate knowledge. For example, Contractor and Woodley (2015) show that frms with stronger technical capabilities (absorptive capacity) beneft
more from (technology) alliances. However, such capable partners also depict a potential
threat as they may engage in a learning race with the original technology supplying partner.
Yang and colleagues (2015) also suggest that a frm’s relative capability to learn from its
counterpart holds the key to understanding the learning race phenomenon. Specifcally,
their study shows that frms with a higher learning capability relative to their alliance partner
exhibit higher levels of stock performance. However, equity-based arrangements suppress
competitive learning, whereas market similarity between the alliance partners aggravates
the learning race. Although the empirical evidence is somewhat inconclusive (Chen 2004;
Mowery et al. 1996), studies demonstrate that alliances between competitors are likely to
fail (Park and Russo 1996). If such alliances are undertaken, they certainly demand more
management attention.

Learning alliances
161
Governance form
A frm may derive its ability to assess and acquire knowledge from its governance form decision. Equity-based alliances align the interests of partner frms and offer opportunities for
knowledge transfer and protection against unintentional knowledge leakage. For example,
Chen (2004) and Mowery et al. (1996) reveal that equity-based alliances are superior to nonequity-based alliances in terms of transferring tacit knowledge. Oxley and Wada (2009) corroborate these fndings but also found that equity-based alliances (e.g. joint ventures) limit the
leakage of knowledge unrelated to the alliance relationship. Reciprocal fnancial and organizational relationships, which are typical of equity-based arrangements, foster the transfer of
knowledge, especially tacit knowledge. However, the degree of protection in an equity-based
alliance depends on the overlap between the partner’s knowledge bases; knowledge diversity
between partners may render an equity form obsolete because frms lack suffcient absorptive
capacity (Sampson 2004b).
Decisions pertaining to the alliance design, other than its governance form, can also hinder or reinforce exposure to knowledge that is available through the relationship (Oxley and
Sampson 2004; Zeng and Hennart 2002). Partners can reduce their need for knowledge transfer by limiting the alliance scope, allocating specialized tasks among the partners and forging
alliances with the purpose of knowledge access rather than knowledge acquisition. For example, two frms that forge a marketing and distribution alliance may be more successful if they
exchange market know-how but decide to divide distribution activities to prevent unwanted
knowledge transfers. Therefore, alliance governance should retain the option of knowledge
exchange, which is necessary to achieve learning objectives, while also controlling knowledge
fows in order to protect proprietary know-how and avoid unintended outfows.

Alliance contracts
A frm wishing to protect knowledge may use certain legal mechanisms, such as patents,
copyrights and alliance contracts. Intellectual property protection offers legal protection for
inventions and processes (Arora and Ceccagnoli 2006). If another party uses a patented product or process without obtaining the proper authority, the patent holder may pursue legal
remedies that prevent the use or sale of the product or process and perhaps receive monetary
damages for any such infringement. However, intellectual property only provides limited
protection against unwanted knowledge transfer. For example, patents do not cover all categories of competitively sensitive knowledge, and over-reliance on them may leave a company vulnerable. For high-tech industries, such as electronics and semiconductors, the patent
process discloses information that may enable some competitors to ‘invent around’ the patent.
Therefore, patents have historically been most effective in industries such as pharmaceuticals
and chemicals, where the physical composition of the patented products makes them diffcult
to imitate without violating the patent.
It is also possible to impose certain contractual and legal mechanisms to protect specifc
knowledge from unwanted appropriation:
•
Alliance contracts might explicitly identify knowledge and information that has been
designated as proprietary. Such contracts can specify what capabilities can be shared and
expressly identify those that are not to be shared.

162
•
•
•
•
Learning alliances
A more active approach imposes contractual or legal penalties if an alliance partner deliberately accesses or uses knowledge inappropriately. For example, a contractual clause
might specify monetary penalties or contract termination if knowledge protection agreements are violated, such as when one partner establishes itself as a direct competitor by
using illegally acquired knowledge to build its own product and discloses protected alliance information to outside parties.
A widely used approach for implementing contractual protection requires each individual alliance member to sign a non-disclosure agreement (NDA). Each member is then
bound to protect designated knowledge from being disclosed to outside parties.
Partners might reach some kind of exclusivity agreement so that knowledge exploitation
is restricted to predefned products and/or markets.
Another protective mechanism involves employment limitations, which prohibit companies from offering jobs to the employees of an alliance partner. These limitations are
usually specifed for a given time period and apply to specifc employees who have been
involved in the alliance or have obtained relevant knowledge.

Relational capital
In a learning alliance, the willingness and ability of partners to communicate freely, share
knowledge and risk unintended knowledge transfers is a result of relational capital (Hamel
1991).Trust and commitment signal a willingness to exert effort on behalf of the relationship.
Furthermore, these elements increase proximity, frequency of contact and close interactions
between partners, which further stimulates openness. Kale et al. (2000) fnd that relational
capital based on mutual trust and interactions at the individual level create a basis for learning
and know-how transfer across the exchange interface. Relational capital also fosters the accuracy, timeliness, adequacy and credibility of information exchanged. On the prevention side,
relational capital mitigates the chance of a learning race because it implies a future orientation
in which partners build a relationship that can weather unanticipated problems. Relational
capital also protects frms against involuntary transfers of core or proprietary knowledge to
partners and restricts opportunistic behaviour by alliance partners to prevent the leakage of
critical know-how (Muthusamy and White 2005). For example, Jiang and colleagues (2013)
empirically show that competence trust (e.g. trust in partner’s capability) and goodwill trust
(e.g. trust in partner’s benevolence) function as effective safeguards against knowledge leakage,
specifcally when compared to the effect of formal contracts. In addition, the results suggest
that competence trust and formal contracts complement one another, whereas goodwill trust
and formal contracts are substitutable in their effect on knowledge leakage prevention.

Knowledge characteristics
The nature of the exchanged knowledge affects each party’s ability to assess and acquire knowledge (Simonin 1999). As knowledge ambiguity increases, it becomes more diffcult for other
frms to absorb that knowledge (Kotabe et al. 2003), even though the level of knowledge ambiguity may be different for explicit knowledge and for tacit knowledge. Explicit knowledge,
such as checklists and blueprints, is easy to codify and can be absorbed without loss of integrity. In contrast, tacit knowledge is often complex and integrated into organizational routines,
technologies and individual experiences in such a way that makes it diffcult to transfer across
a frm’s boundaries.Tacit knowledge is more resistant to appropriation, both within and across
Learning alliances
163
frms (Szulanski 1996), because acquiring it requires the active involvement of the knowledge
provider. According to Simonin (1999), knowledge ambiguity—which is caused by factors
such as tacitness (negative), complexity (positive) and organizational distance (positive)—relates
negatively to knowledge transfer.The more tacit the knowledge exchanged in an alliance, the
more the frms’ potential to assess and acquire the knowledge is hampered, especially if the
partners do not take additional measures to facilitate its transfer.Therefore, even though tacit
knowledge promises a competitive advantage and represents a key motive for learning alliance
formation, it is diffcult to transfer, which impedes efforts to capitalize on the alliance.

Knowledge practices
Knowledge practices involve the organizational routines, control and coordination mechanisms, and systems that frms use to manage inter-frm learning (Meier 2011). Firms that
engage actively and purposefully in building and deploying such practices are more effective
at transferring and creating knowledge as they reinforce partners’ motivational orientations
towards learning, ensure resource allocations, raise the quality of human assets and stimulate
the development of learning-based organizational climates and incentive structures (Chen
2004).The following are some of the forms of knowledge practices that can be used (Inkpen
2000; Lyles and Salk 1996):
•
•
•
•
•
Personnel transfer, delegation of expatriates, training and education programmes and
oversight of a partner frm’s alliance managers support the transfer of knowledge.
Proactive technology sharing, articulating goals and aligning learning strategies function
as knowledge connections.
Frequent interaction, active involvement and on-site meetings beneft knowledge exchange.
Advisory systems, liaison functions, communities of practice and shared ICT systems
enhance knowledge exchange.
Reward and incentive programmes can be structured and implemented in such a way
that performance appraisals incorporate measures of employees’ efforts to learn and/or
protect knowledge.

However, knowledge practices may differ for explicit and tacit knowledge transfer.According
to Evangelista and Hau (2009), for example, commitment from senior management reinforces
the transfer of explicit knowledge rather than tacit knowledge. Revilla et al. (2005) argue that
frms must blend different learning approaches with distinct management styles, depending
on their knowledge management objectives: a structural approach fts best with both exploitative learning with a focus on existing knowledge and strategic learning with a focus on new
knowledge; a social approach fts best with both interactive learning with a focus on existing
knowledge and integrative learning with a focus on new knowledge. In addition, JanowiczPanjaitan and Noorderhaven (2008) demonstrate that informal knowledge practices (such as
informal meetings, spontaneous interactions, both during and outside working hours) have
a positive infuence on knowledge transfer, whereas formal practices (participation in joint
projects, joint training sessions, organized events, etc.) have a positive but diminishing effect.
These fndings are corroborated by Khan and colleagues (2015) reporting that formal socialization mechanisms enhance the comprehension and speed of knowledge transfer from international joint ventures to local partners, whereas informal socialization mechanisms enhance
comprehension but not speed.

164
Learning alliances
The role of staf involved in the alliance
Despite not usually being involved in the day-to-day operation of alliances, senior management often plays a signifcant and vital role in enabling or constraining knowledge fows.
Senior managers must identify the frm’s core capabilities and determine which knowledge
cannot be transferred.Although senior managers may not make all such decisions themselves,
they must ensure that adequate management processes exist so that appropriately designated
members of the frm can make timely decisions. Senior management must also create awareness by stressing personally the importance of protecting the company’s critical capabilities.
They should also ensure that the required resources are allocated to protect knowledge and
educate the work force. Failure to make these decisions clear and communicate them widely
can cause alliance members and other employees to share information inadvertently that
could harm the frm’s competitive position.
Alliance managers should endorse and strengthen senior management’s emphasis on the
protection of core capabilities. Alliance managers may appoint or act as knowledge managers, who monitor, survey and scrutinize critical knowledge to ensure it has been classifed
accurately and that alliance members and other involved employees are properly informed
and educated about relevant issues.The role of a knowledge manager is usually an additional
duty that is assumed by the overall alliance manager or another key manager (for example,
a business coordinator or lead engineer). Alliance managers must also ensure that employees
follow the guidelines and procedures established by the knowledge protection system. Finally,
alliance managers might also act as consultants if employees believe the circumstances surrounding knowledge protection are vague or unclear.
In turn, these employees constitute an important knowledge protection mechanism.
Knowledge leakage is often primarily dependent on the choices of individuals who work
daily in the alliance and come in to regular contact with alliance partners.Any point of contact between the frm’s employees and its partner’s employees represents an information fow
that could allow the inappropriate communication of critical knowledge. One way to protect
knowledge is to provide employees with education and training programmes, which are usually conducted in conjunction with the alliance manager. For employees who are indirectly
involved or may only occasionally come into contact with partner employees, alliance managers must also ensure that they understand the importance of maintaining confdentiality.
Firms may also require employees to report any contact with alliance partners if they believe
an information issue exists. Such a report would be advisable, for example, if an employee
believed an alliance partner was ‘fshing around’ for critical knowledge that had been marked
as off-limits.

Learning alliances: decision-making steps
A high-quality knowledge interface creates the potential for alliance partners to evaluate
each other’s competences, strengths and weaknesses. Such an interface enables a frm to
assess the value of new knowledge and integrate this knowledge into its existing knowledge
base. However, a high-quality knowledge interface also increases the degree of openness,
which exposes alliance partners to the danger of losing valuable knowledge, thus creating
the need for knowledge protection. To steer learning alliances towards success, we connect
the governance of learning alliances to the stages of our alliance development framework
(see Figure 11.1).

Learning alliances
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
165
Assess knowledge vulnerability to get insights in a firm’s capabilities
and its willingness to expose knowledge to external parties.
An alliance is preferred when a firm lacks possibilities to internally
develop knowledge, when a merger or acquisition confronts it with
resource indivisibility and when commoditized knowledge is available.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend partner selection criteria with partner’s competitive learning
intent, relative absorptive capacity and partner’s financial strength.
Resource complementarity and organizational, human, and cultural
fit facilitate learning; good partner fit requires knowledge protection .

3
Alliance
negotiation
Adopt integrative negotiation strategy; provides a foundation for
interfirm learning and relational governance; knowledge valuation is
critical but is difficult due to tacitness, public goods and uncertainty.
Negotiation agenda list topics, such as non-competing clauses,
penalties for unauthorized knowledge use and areas of collaboration.

4
Alliance
design
5
Alliance
launch
FIGURE 11.1
Preferred governance form is equity-based but conditional on the
overlap of knowledge bases and partner’s history a, non-equity
based arrangement could suffice.
Focus on contractual clauses pertaining to alliance scope, task
specialization, patents, monitoring, penalties and so on .
Organize social meetings to learn from one another as mutual
understanding is prerequisite to attain learning outcomes.
Communicate across alliance staff which knowledge can be shared
and which knowledge is not part of the agreement.

6
Alliance
management
Invest in relational governance, install conflict resolution
mechanisms and stimulate flexibility to encourage interfirm learning
and prevent knowledge leakage.
Recognize the roles of top management, alliance management and
alliance employees in knowledge transfer and protection.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with learning outcome
(quantifiable) and process indicators as well as prospective indicators,
which together tap into learning outcomes, knowledge leakage and
learning climate and behaviours.

8
Alliance
termination
Develop initiatives to capture critical knowledge and protect against
(additional) knowledge leakage.
Protect reputation as trustworthy learning partner.

Alliance development framework: learning alliances
Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the alliance strategy formulation stage, frms decide whether an alliance is an appropriate governance mode for acquiring and/or developing new knowledge, technology and
capabilities. From a learning alliance perspective, the objective is to obtain or access knowledge that reinforces the frm’s knowledge base.To this end, a market exchange is unsuited as it
means that the desired knowledge is readily available to rivals as well; commoditized knowledge is not likely to contribute to a frm’s competitive advantage. When a frm recognizes
166
Learning alliances
that it both lacks the desired knowledge and the possibility to develop it internally (e.g. lack
of know-how or too expensive), a merger or acquisition could be a viable alternative. But in
most instances, resource indivisibility impedes this governance mode as a frm is often only
interested in accessing and obtaining specifc knowledge, not a target’s complete knowledge
endowment. Alternatively, an alliance constitutes an appropriate option as it grants access to
desired knowledge while offering fexibility. For example, pharmaceuticals forge alliances
with a wide range of small bio-tech frms to access their knowledge and only acquire a biotech frm when it has developed a commercial viable particle for a drug.
However, exposing critical knowledge to external parties through an alliance increases
the risk of unwanted spillovers, which can directly undermine a frm’s competitive position.
During their strategic analysis, therefore, frms must also assess their vulnerability by analyzing
the knowledge resources they possess, as well as the strategic relevance and transferability
of that knowledge. If a frm’s knowledge has strategic value and the risk of knowledge leakage
is relatively high, internal development and mergers and acquisitions might become preferred
alternatives because these governance modes provide better protection. However, if the potential risks of an alliance are outweighed by its benefts, the frm should consider taking steps
to protect itself.The frm must consider its decisions at the subsequent stages with great care.

Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection stage, a frm selects the partner(s) with which it can establish the
learning alliance. Partner ft must enable inter-frm learning, and resource complementarity
between partners is also important. The partners’ knowledge foundations should have suffcient overlap to enable knowledge transfer, but the partners should also be different enough
to capitalize on learning opportunities. Organizational ft is particularly relevant because it
enables partners to build an adequate knowledge interface through compatible organizational
structures and systems. Human and cultural ft, which suggest similarity between employees
in terms of experience, background, education, and professional and cultural identities, are
also important because they foster learning at the micro level between individuals. However,
frms must be aware that, as partner ft increases, so does the need for knowledge protection.
Partner selection criteria may also include relative absorptive capacity, the learning intent of
potential partners and fnancial resources. If partners have differing abilities to evaluate, assess
and assimilate external knowledge, this could create learning races, which are likely to lead
to a premature dissolution of the alliance. Relevant indicators of absorptive capacity include
existing knowledge resources, learning structures, staff competences and knowledge practices.
When a potential partner has high absorptive capacity, protective measures may be required,
specifcally if an alliance is formed with a competitor. Knowledge leakage to a rival usually
jeopardizes a frm’s competitive position. Furthermore, the assessment of a partner’s learning
intent should reveal whether possible knowledge spillovers are likely to be exploited. However,
although indirect sources of information can provide important clues about learning intent,
frms must remain aware that this intent may be hidden, misrepresented or denied. For example,
a systematic pattern of alliances focused on an emerging technology implies competitive learning intent. If a potential partner has such a competitive learning intent (i.e. is a direct competitor), detrimental learning races are more likely.To prevent such races, a frm should consider
whether it can impose knowledge protection mechanisms on its partner without destroying
the value creation potential of the alliance. In addition, fnancial strength of a partner may
Learning alliances
167
constitute a selection criterion as building and maintaining successful learning alliances often
require substantial fnancial investments in, for example, research centres and patenting.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
This stage involves negotiations between alliance partners regarding scope and conditions; if
the parties reach a consensus, they can formalize the outcomes in an alliance contract.When
parties adopt integrative negotiation strategies, they are likely to create openness, build transparency, engage in mutual information exchange and stimulate joint problem solving, which
increases the chances that they will achieve aligned interests. Furthermore, this negotiation
strategy creates a solid foundation for learning alliances, which tend to have uncertain learning
outcomes and depend on cooperative alliance processes. Distributive negotiation strategies, on
the other hand, prevent mutually benefcial solutions and require withholding or distorting
information to secure and protect individual interests.Though possessing valuable knowledge
may provide a frm with a bargaining power advantage, using it to support distributive negotiation strategies undermines the knowledge creation potential of a learning alliance.
Furthermore, in order for a learning alliance to succeed, each partner must contribute
some knowledge, whether it is in the form of basic research capability, product development
skills, manufacturing capabilities or market know-how.An ex-ante assessment of the value of
knowledge is cumbersome; it is easier to attach value to tangibles than to measure the value of
intellectual capital. However, as competitive abilities increasingly come to rely on frm competences, efforts to assess their value are necessary. Firms should assess investments made in
building skills that are central to their competitive advantage and should judge the competitive consequences of a partner’s development of those same skills. However, the knowledge
created in an alliance often constitutes a public good, meaning that parties can appropriate
knowledge and information without depleting the source during different stages of alliance
development. This makes it diffcult, if not impossible, to determine the amount of knowledge creation, let alone formalize parties’ claims to this realized knowledge and distribute
it according to a predetermined rule. In addition, a negotiation agenda may contain topics,
such as noncompeting provisions, penalties for unauthorized acquisition and exploitation of
knowledge and the knowledge scope (i.e. the areas in which knowledge is shared).

Step 4: alliance design
An alliance design shapes the fow of knowledge, the breadth and depth of the interaction
between the two frms and the incentives for inter-frm learning. Decisions about the knowledge interface should aim to enhance inter-frm learning by directly affecting the partners’
ability to absorb knowledge and the rate of knowledge dissemination. As a result, parties
should have little diffculty assessing the value and relevance of new knowledge or assimilating
that knowledge into their existing knowledge stores. In addition, because an alliance design
functions as a frst and critical protection mechanism against knowledge leakage, it should
incorporate incentives to learn and barriers to avoid knowledge leakage.
The decision regarding governance form is likely to indicate some preference for equity
arrangements because such arrangements stimulate knowledge exchanges but still safeguard against knowledge leakages. If the partner frms have already built relational capital,
perhaps through their prior collaborations, the fexibility and lower coordination costs of
168
Learning alliances
non-equity-based arrangements may outweigh the benefts of an equity-based form. In addition, frms must formalize contractual decisions. Contractual clauses should state that knowledge exchange is tied exclusively to non-competitive activities, is protected by patents and
copyrights, or is subject to shared ownership by partners. Such restrictions limit the likelihood
of competitive and opportunistic behaviour. Furthermore, partners may reduce the alliance
scope (that is, market overlap in alliance and frm activities), which also minimizes the risk of
leaking sensitive knowledge to another partner.Therefore, the scope of the alliance may only
involve precompetitive cooperation. Contractual clauses specifying how and when partners
are supposed to contribute fnancial resources are also critical.
In learning alliances, the potential outfow of proprietary technology is partially controlled
by partitioning tasks between partners, but in turn, co-specialization also impedes knowledge
transfer. Sequential knowledge sharing may also help build partner trust before the partners
share sensitive knowledge that could harm either frm’s competitive position. For example,
a frm might start by sharing older technologies and gradually start sharing newer ones over
time; this approach enables frms to observe partner behaviour and secure intent. Control
over human resources is also a means of protecting intellectual capital. For example, agreeing
to involve senior management and operating managers in alliance formation should stimulate
learning and prevent post-formation opportunistic behaviour. Because knowledge fows over
learning interfaces, staff members who are directly involved in the alliance should be allocated
in such a way that they constitute a collaborative membrane, maximizing the infow of necessary knowledge while minimizing unintended outfows. Agreement on the location of the
alliance is also important as it affects partners’ ability to control knowledge fows. For example, a neutral location offers partners equal opportunities to learn, whereas research activities
located at one of the partner’s facilities offers its counterpart a learning advantage.

Step 5: alliance launch
During the alliance launch stage, the partner frms evolve from negotiation and design to executing the alliance contract. Systemically organizing the alliance implementation in a learning
alliance is critical as joint learning is surrounded by ambiguity. First, although partners may
have agreed upon joint learning objectives (e.g. development and commoditization of an
innovative service), operational staff may have questions, possess different views about innovation and may have a natural disposition against the rival partner to share key knowledge.
As part of the alliance launch strategy, the launch manager should develop initiatives, such as
kick-off meetings, joint training programmes and communities of practice, to inform, motivate and provide clear directions to involved staff.As part of operational plans, communication
should also focus on informing staff about motives for the learning alliance and also about
what skills and technologies are off-limits to the partner and how learning processes are to
be monitored. Second, as learning thrives on relational capital, the launch manager should
invest in trust-building and provide a context in which strong social networks between staff
members can emerge and fourish. Such networks enhance learning, stimulate creativity and
provide protection against unwanted knowledge leakage.To accomplish these two tasks, it is
critical that alliance launch managers fnd a balance between relational governance and formal governance.The former facilitates learning efforts, and the latter enables monitoring and
detecting deviant (learning) behaviours via tailored performance metric systems.

Learning alliances
169
Step 6: alliance management
Within the setting of learning alliances, the alliance management stage initiates day-to-day
operations that enable partner frms to create and exchange enough knowledge to obtain
advantages over rivals outside the alliance but still prevent the wholesale transfer of core skills
to a partner. A critical task for management is to build relational capital, which serves two
main purposes:
1
2
Relational capital increases proximity, frequency of contact and close interactions between
partners, which enables them to overcome learning barriers and embrace transparency
and receptivity. Joint information processing makes partners better able to evaluate each
other’s competences, strengths and weaknesses, which facilitates the integration of new
knowledge within a frm’s existing knowledge base.
Relational capital reduces the probability of distributive-oriented learning strategies that
focus on securing individual interests, transfer of knowledge that is not part of the agreement, protecting proprietary knowledge and appropriating knowledge without considering the alliance’s value-creation potential.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
This stage requires a performance metric system that should include learning and relational
metrics. Learning metrics should comprise metrics capturing learning processes and outcomes, which are pivotal to steering learning alliances.Whereas process metrics, such as the
learning behaviour of researchers and the number of documents exchanged, provide information about the quality and working of the knowledge infrastructure, outcome metrics, such
as degree of knowledge leakage and number of commercially viable product innovations, are
indicative of the alliance’s success. In addition, prospective indicators, such as the patenting
rate and R&D spending, are required to obtain information about the alliance’s progress.
Relational metrics capture the quality of the relationship and entail trust and commitment
metrics. Because relational processes are critical to learning alliances, the insights that related
metrics provide enable frms to enhance the alliance’s learning climate: to stimulate inter-frm
learning while enforcing relational protection against leakage. Taken together, learning and
relational metrics provide alliance managers with relevant information to initiate adaptations
to their alliance design and management.

Step 8: alliance termination
If partners have reached this stage, it means they have decided to dissolve the alliance. Depending on the alliance contract, each frm must capture knowledge and secure it against loss.
Using the performance metric system, a frm can assess the extent to which it has achieved
its learning objectives. If the outcome is not satisfactory, the frm should explore possibilities
to internalize critical knowledge as well as erect additional knowledge protection barriers,
if possible, to prevent the other partner from appropriating valuable knowledge. A frm also
might examine contractual clauses and, if required, confront the other partner. However, for
the sake of its future alliance efforts, the frm must protect its reputation as a trustworthy
learning alliance partner.

170
Learning alliances
Summary
Learning alliances provide platforms for the creation and application of knowledge; their
essential purpose is to create, transfer, assemble, integrate and exploit knowledge assets. As
such, learning alliances function as vehicles to enhance a frm’s competitive advantage. However, learning alliances also present risks for a frm as they provide partner frms with an
opportunity to obtain access to knowledge that is not part of the initial alliance agreement.
The risk of unwanted knowledge leakage creates the need for knowledge protection. To
this end, this chapter has elaborated on mechanisms that enable or impede inter-frm learning, including absorptive capacity, alliance governance, contracts, relational capital, knowledge
practices and alliance staff. In a learning alliance, the primary task of alliance management is
to achieve the delicate balance between exploiting learning opportunities and curbing learning risks. To guide decision making, we presented managerial guidelines for each alliance
development stage.

CASE: HOLST CENTRE1
The Holst Centre is an independent open-innovation centre for R&D that develops generic
technologies for wireless autonomous sensor technologies and fexible electronics. A key
feature of the Holst Centre is its partnership model with industry and academia, which is
based on shared development roadmaps and programmes. This kind of cross-fertilization
enables the Holst Centre to tune its scientifc strategy to industrial needs. The Holst Centre
was set up in 2005 by IMEC (Flanders, Belgium) and TNO (the Netherlands), with support
from the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs and the Government of Flanders. The centre is
named after Gilles Holst, a Dutch pioneer in research and development and the frst director of Philips Research. Located on High-Tech Campus Eindhoven, the Holst Centre benefts
from the state-of-the-art on-site facilities and has more than 170 employees, representing
roughly 25 nationalities and commitments from approximately 35 industrial partners.
During the 1990s and the early 2000s, Philips Research (formerly Natlab) found it increasingly diffcult to provide cutting-edge but affordable R&D services to the Philips product divisions. Rapid technological developments made it increasingly diffcult for Philips Research
to remain a front-runner in all of the necessary technology domains using only its in-house
R&D resources. The future was in combining knowledge that was developed and owned
by Philips with knowledge of other frms and research institutions in a more open environment. To this end, the closed ‘Philips Research Campus’ was transformed into the open
‘High-Tech Campus Eindhoven’. Moreover, many of the Philips-owned laboratories on this
campus were made accessible to third parties through a separate organization called ‘MiPlaza’. Supporting activities and facilities such as restaurants, sports facilities and shops were
centralized in a building called ‘the Strip’, which became the central meeting place of the
High-Tech Campus and a vital element in open communication and exchanging information. Independent organizations were set up to facilitate and orchestrate open innovation.
The primary role of these organizations is to bring people and organizations together and
facilitate active communication, information sharing and co-research. The most important
facilitator is the Holst Centre.
At the Holst Centre, leading scientists work on research programmes together with scientists of partner companies and universities. These parties participate in research programmes
Learning alliances
171
facilitated by the Holst Centre to share ideas, costs and risks. Conducting the type of research
in which the Holst Centre is involved requires signifcant investment, which may not be
affordable for many frms individually. The Dutch government provides subsidies, which
creates more favourable conditions for partners to join the research programmes. Another
important motivation for joining research programmes at the Holst Centre is the availability
of research competences that are complementary to those available at one’s own organization. The Holst Centre facilitates and expands its research programmes by actively managing
the partnerships. For example, in 2022, TNO and Imec (two independent research institutes) signed a letter of intent committing to work together on integrated photonics. Both
research centres have been working on photonics innovations for some time, but they have
now joined forces to accelerate the development of the photonics industry in the Netherlands, Belgium and Europe. The collaboration will start in 2023 within Holst Centre. Holst
Centre plays an active role in PhotonDelta’s National Growth Fund proposal and will further
strengthen its position as a knowledge centre with this agreement.
In other words, the Holst Centre plays an active role in facilitating knowledge creation
and knowledge sharing, while respecting the fact that the background knowledge of each of
the participating frms may not be affected. Therefore, the Holst Centre focuses its research
programmes on generic technologies for ‘wireless autonomous transducer’ solutions and
‘systems in foil’. The Holst Centre does not engage in product development, which is left to
the participating companies. The focus on this so-called pre-competitive research reduces
the threat of competitive interests jeopardizing the open research model. The Holst Centre
also engages in active partner portfolio management. Traditional alliances tend to focus on
single goals and typically consist of a fxed number of specifc partners, which team up during a fxed period. Since technology development is so dynamic, various competences are
required at various stages of the research programme. This might require partners to phase
in or out of the research programmes. The Holst Centre has implemented effective partner
portfolio management structures by using research roadmaps, knowledge mapping and
partner selection strategies.
The research programmes are managed by roadmaps. Research roadmaps typically
describe goals that can be realized in fve to ten years, and for each roadmap, work breakdown structures are provided that describe how the long-term goals are to be achieved.
These research roadmaps allow the necessary research competences to be identifed. The
Holst Centre then approaches appropriate partners that will beneft from the shared results,
are able to deliver the required competences and ft the open innovation culture within the
Holst Centre. In order to build the strongest knowledge and value chains in the Holst Centre, partners must be leading players in their feld. Diversity is also considered a vital asset
to the research community active within the Holst Centre. This refers not only to diversity
in research competences and knowledge areas but also diversity in culture and nationality.
As well as large corporations, small companies and startups are also partners of the Holst
Centre. Research benefts from the dynamic atmosphere within the consortium.
Individual participating organizations do not have a blocking vote regarding the admission of a new partner. However, the Holst Centre communicates closely with existing participants about the admission of new participants in order to maintain the required motivation
and provide reassurance that appropriate choices will be made. The Holst Centre charges
entrance and participation fees, which entitle partners to non-exclusive access to the
research results. When new partners step into an existing research programme, they must
pay an entrance fee that increases over time to maintain a fair situation between earlier
172
Learning alliances
and later entrants. By paying the entrance fee, the new partners receive access to the background knowledge that was created in the research programme prior to their involvement.
However, this access is limited to background knowledge that is required to exploit newly
created foreground knowledge (the intended results achieved during participation).
The Holst Centre also actively helps organizations that are considering joining the consortium to establish what should be exclusive and what can be brought into the consortium. The Holst Centre provides an important assurance to participating organizations that
collaboration will not endanger in-house research activities and intellectual property. Each
research programme is managed by a programme manager (a Holst Centre representative),
who plays an important role in preventing participation imbalances. Research contributions and transfer of research results are actively monitored. Parties are confronted if any
imbalances between knowledge contributions and knowledge acquisitions are detected
or suspected. Partners receive only access to the knowledge resulting from the specifc
programme(s) in which they participate, and the Holst Centre’s open innovation works only
within secure environments. Not all knowledge is open to all participants, and participation
does involve certain obligations. In other words, the Holst Centre’s open innovation is not
‘public innovation’.

Questions
1
2
3
Explain why the mechanisms the Holst Centre uses to facilitate knowledge exchange
and guarantee knowledge protection are efective.
Explain why the Holst centre promotes pre-emptive research and openness among participants but does not consider marketization a primary task.
How would these mechanisms operate in a single alliance between two partners?

Note
1 Interview with a senior executive of the Holst Centre; HSD (2022).

12
CO-BRANDING ALLIANCES
Co-branding, co-partnering or dual branding are all terms to refer to the act of presenting
two established brand names, owned by different companies, simultaneously to customers.
Such tactics have made inroads into nearly every industry, from automotive and high-tech
internet frms to banking and fast food providers. Co-branding alliances constitute a weapon
for frms as they attempt to transfer the positive associations of their partners’ products or
brands to the newly formed co-brand, or composite brand, create synergy between existing
brands, or even build up (or change) an existing brand.This avenue draws in new customers,
increases brand awareness, supports customer loyalty, offers signals of quality and an image
of success and binds the brand with certain emotions. Although a co-branding strategy thus
can be a win–win proposition for alliance partners, even when those brands have unequal
standing or brand equity in the marketplace, co-branding alliances present their own set of
unique risks. For example, actions by one partner frm may damage the other’s reputation,
established co-brands are diffcult to dismantle and brand spillover effects may be distributed
unevenly across the partners.This tension—between reaping the benefts of co-branding and
simultaneously protecting frms from negative repercussions—confronts alliance managers
with a unique challenge.Therefore, our frst section discusses this co-branding alliance challenge, and the following section elaborates mechanisms for dealing with it.We use the alliance
development framework to develop managerial guidelines for co-branding alliances in the
third section, and the chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The co-branding alliance challenge
A brand is the personality that identifes a product, service or company and its relationship
with key constituencies, such as customers, staff, partners and investors (Kotler 1991). In addition to a brand name, a brand may be a term, sign, symbol or drawing or some combination
of these elements. The brand translates the organizational identity—the internal perception
of organizations and their product and services—into terms that external stakeholders can
understand, with the goal of creating a positive image.The brand also cues customers to recall
images they have formed through their past experiences with brands or information they
obtained about it (Swait et al. 1993). When further information is not available, customers
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-12
174
Co-branding alliances
can use the brand (or brand names) to make judgements about the product. Consequently,
a frm hopes to position its brand in a way that makes its uniqueness and value apparent to
customers. As a form of communication, brands effectively communicate, consistent with
frms’ actions, which gives customers deeper and more meaningful consumption experiences.
To build strong brand reputations, frms increasingly employ co-branding alliances, which
pair two (or more) individual brands and present them simultaneously to customers (Geylani
et al. 2008), often in the form of a single, unique product or service (Chang and Chang 2008).
Co-branding alliances link the participating brands in the mind of consumers to enable the
transfer of thoughts and feelings from one brand to another.This use of two or more brand
names to introduce new products helps the partners capitalize on their combined reputations
in an attempt to achieve immediate recognition and positive evaluations by potential buyers (see Table 12.1). These immediate attitudes towards a particular co-branded alliance also
infuence subsequent attitudes towards the individual brands in that alliance. For example, the
presence of a second brand on a product reinforces the perception of high product quality
and thus higher product evaluations. Most co-branding relationships include brands with an
obvious or natural relationship that has the potential to be commercially benefcial for both
parties.When the target customers of each frm match, at least to some extent, customers also
should accept this connection and thereby formulate associations easily.
Several motives underpin frms’ decisions to forge co-branding alliances (Chang and Chang
2008; Erevelles et al. 2008). First, frms may fnd themselves unable to reach new customer segments with their individual marketing apparatus.A co-branding alliance provides access to the
partner frm’s marketing infrastructure, which is likely to reach somewhat different customer
segments, or reaches them in a different way, increasing sales revenues. Second, marketing
activities are costly, especially when they include new product development and launches.
A co-branding partnership shares such marketing costs across the partners.Third, marketing
activities often pose risk to individual frms, again especially when their scope includes new
TABLE 12.1 Examples of co-branding alliances
Description
Kellogg–Nickelodeon
In 2022, Kellogg established a co-brand partnership with
Nickelodeon.The partners intend to co-create a new green apple
favoured cereal inspired by Nickelodeon’s green slime.The cereal
contains green and orange coloured loops and green pieces that
turn milk the colour of Nickelodeon’s famous green slime.

GoPro–Red Bull
In 2016, GoPro and RedBull announced they were joining
forces on a multi-year, global partnership that includes content
production, distribution, cross-promotion and product innovation.
As part of the agreement, Red Bull received equity in GoPro, and
GoPro became Red Bull’s exclusive provider of point-of-view
imaging technology for capturing immersive footage of Red Bull’s
media productions and events.

Heineken–The Shoe Surgeon
In 2022, Heineken, a beer brewer, teamed up with The Shoe
Surgeon, a celebrated sneaker designer.To support the launch of
Heineken Silver, the brewer’s lighter, low-alcohol beer, the partners
introduced a limited edition Heinekicks.

Sources: GoPro (2016); Kiefer (2022); Kellogg (2022).

Co-branding alliances
175
product development. Relying on the strength of a partner brand through a co-branding
alliance, each member has a better chance of reaching its marketing goals. Fourth, a frm that
aligns its brand with another is often seeking to enhance its product image and credibility,
which can then improve customer confdence.These motives refect the promise of positive
spillover effects (Park et al. 1996): reinforcing positive reciprocal effects of co-branding on alliance partners’ brands. However, co-branding alliances also may result in image impairment if
combining the two brands causes brand meaning to transfer in ways that were never intended.
In particular, a negative brand spillover effect, which represents an adverse impact of cobranding on the perceptions of stakeholders, including customers’ perceptions (Park et al.
1996), results when frms that are incompatible in some way forge a co-branding alliance.
For example, inconsistency between customers’ associations for the two brands leads to a
negative response if the alliance forces the customer to transfer the association of one brand
to the other. A potential repositioning of a brand also could adversely infuence the other
party’s brand. Furthermore, such negative spillover effects often get unevenly distributed, such
that one partner experiences positive repercussions, while its counterpart suffers the negative outcomes. Such an unbalanced spillover effect creates a free-riding problem; the partner
experiencing positive effects lacks the incentive to accommodate any changes to address the
negative effects suffered by its partner.
In addition to potential negative spillover effects, a co-branding alliance can reduce a frm’s
fexibility because once this association becomes rooted in stakeholders’ perceptions, it is diffcult to end the partnership without incurring substantial costs.When a co-brand achieves a
particular position in a market, it is diffcult to knock it out of that place—and even more diffcult to re-establish a single brand on its own. Furthermore, customers do not just accept that
things can go wrong, and rebuilding a damaged reputation requires substantial investment. In
particular, inappropriate actions by one alliance partner may have severe repercussions on its
counterpart’s brand, though reputation damage is also possible owing to events beyond the
alliance, such as when interest groups bring pressure to bear on one of the alliance partners.
Firms engaged in a co-branding alliance thus confront unique challenges. On the one hand,
they need to collaborate to strengthen their brand reputations and achieve positive spillover
effects. On the other hand, these partners risk damaging their brand reputations through negative spillover effects and the potential for harmful actions by partners.Alliance partners that can
deal effectively with such challenges have an opportunity to create powerful synergies that not
only improve reputations but also accelerate performance.Those that fail to do so, however, are
likely to damage the alliance’s progress, the partners’ reputations and their own brands.

Managing co-branding alliances
A wide range of co-branding alliance activities take place in the marketplace (Geylani et al.
2008), ranging from touting several brands in a single advertisement (e.g. joint Shell–Ferrari
ads, messages about the complementary consumption of McDonald’s fries and Coca-Cola)
to jointly branded products (e.g. the Lexus Coach Edition, Kellogg’s Healthy Choice cereal;
see Box 12.1 for some other examples). Because customers seek consistency and internal harmony in their attitudes, but their evaluations of one brand are infuenced by the context of
another co-brand, it is important to distinguish these various types of co-branding alliances.
In general, co-branding consists of four types (Chang and Chang 2008;Washburn et al. 2000).
First, in a joint promotion, two brands promote their products together, usually because
one or both of them hopes to secure a corporate endorsement that will improve its market
176
Co-branding alliances
position. For example, cross-marketing co-branding involves the mutual promotion by two
companies, such as when one company includes coupons for another company in its packaging, in return for which the other company features a promotion from the frst company in
its direct mailing to its client base.
Second, joint advertising occurs when a specifc product owned by one frm appears in the
advertising campaign or product of another frm. In Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me,
a woman in a photo shoot uses a Powerbook G3 Lombard; in Mission Impossible 2, Anthony
Hopkins’ character describes the mission on a Powerbook G3 Wallstreet. Unlike joint promotion, in joint advertising, partners avoid long-term or repetitive campaigns. However, both
joint promotion and joint advertising are relatively easy to design and manage as the effort is
limited mainly to the frms’ marketing departments.
Third, when promoting the complementary use of their products, frms endorse the brands
of a distinct yet complementary product. In addition to aligning the brands, such efforts can
evoke favourable responses from consumers. For example, Nike and Apple suggest using an
iPod with running shoes to encourage faster times, further distances and personal coaching.
Such complementary uses again constitute a less intensive form of collaboration because the
partner frms turn to existing products to endorse their brands.
Fourth, physical product integration or ingredient co-branding involves actual product
integration. One brand, which is usually the market leader for its product, supplies that product as a component in another branded product. In one example, Bacardi and Coca-Cola
provide mixers with both brand names that suggest combining their fagship products to
make a rum-and-cola drink. Ingredient co-branding alliance is thus the most intensive form
of collaboration because it involves multiple departments, including product design, production and marketing. It appears particularly common when a supplier comes under the threat
of entry by a competitor because the incumbent supplier can reduce the probability of this
entry while rewarding its downstream partner with a lower price.

BOX 12.1 ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF CO-BRANDING
Partnering charitable causes with brands has become a common practice, referred to as
cause–brand alliances. Allying a cause with a familiar brand improves attitudes towards
the cause if the cause is relatively unfamiliar, but it also tends to result in more favourable brand associations. Firms might also sponsor sports or the arts in an attempt to
associate their brands with renowned events, athletes, artists and celebrities. Adidas’
long track record of alliances with famous athletes features partnerships with David
Beckham and Lionel Messi. In addition, frms forge global co-branding alliances to
obtain global coverage for their brands or use co-branding alliances to extend the number of product categories in which they are active. Philips and Nivea combined their
brand names and product to mass market the Cool Skin: an electric razor that dispenses
shaving lotion; Gillette M3 power shaving equipment is co-branded with Duracell batteries, both brands owned by Proctor & Gamble; the BMW–Rover alliance to develop
the new Mini constituted a brand extension strategy. Although they difer in nature,
these alternative forms of co-branding alliances all seek to improve competitive positions through an alignment with a prestigious partner brand.

Co-branding alliances
177
Managing spillover efects in co-branding alliances
The main principle behind co-branding alliances, irrespective of the type of alliance, is that
the allying frms help each other to exploit their brands.The purpose of their double appeal is
to capitalize on the brand value of the partner brand to achieve immediate recognition and a
positive evaluation from potential buyers. In managing co-branding alliances, frms may focus
on fve instruments that infuence the emergence of positive—and prevent the creation of
negative—spillover effects (Simonin and Ruth 1998): (1) brand and product ft, (2) preexisting
brand attitudes, (3) brand equity, (4) alliance partner behaviour and (5) contractual provisions
(see Table 12.2).

Brand and product ft
The success of co-branding alliances primarily depends on associations that (potential) customers have with the involved brands. That is, the likelihood that consumers will purchase
the new product increases when two brands ft together (Moon and Sprott 2016; Nabec et
al. 2016). Co-branding alliances form to increase positive perceptions of at least one of the
brands involved; the presence of a second brand creates the possibility that the two brands will
be perceived as similar in quality. For example, if one brand is less well known than the other,
a co-branding alliance can increase assimilation, such that the image of the less well-known
brand comes to align with the image of the better known brand and its values, in the minds of
consumers.The existence of overall cohesiveness between the two brands makes evaluations
of the brand alliance more positive and favourable than they would be if the brands and their
associations were regarded as incompatible and inconsistent. Whereas perceived ft between
the two brands, products or services thus offers a predictor of alliance success, brand misft
impedes alliance performance (Chang and Chang 2008).
TABLE 12.2 Managing co-branding alliances
Description
Implications
Brand and
product ft
The extent to which brands and/or
products are perceived by customers
to possess similar attributes.

Overall cohesiveness between brands
and/or products results in more
favourable perceptions of the co-brand.

Pre-existing
brand attitudes
Initial attitudes towards an individual
brand affect dispositions towards the
co-branding alliance.

Negative and positive pre-existing
brand attitudes impact the direction
and nature of brand-spillover effects.

Brand equity
Set of assets and liabilities linked to a
brand’s name or symbol, which adds
to or subtracts from the perceived
brand value.

Brand equity management enables
partners to reinforce positive and
mitigate negative brand-spillover
effects.

Partner’s
behaviour
Perceptions of partner’s competence
and morals are critical, as they affect
perceptions of the co-brand.

Incompetent (e.g. low-quality) or
immoral (e.g. dishonest) behaviour
results in negative brand-spillover effects.

Contractual
provisions
Contracts help to reduce the adverse
repercussions of negative brandspillover effects.

Contracts may contain clauses related
to licensing, trademarks, intellectual
property, liability and exclusivity.

178
Co-branding alliances
Brand misft arises when customers perceive incompatibility between the alliance partners’
brands. For example, if a high-quality brand partners with a low-cost brand, customers of the
high-quality brand will perceive a misft and experience more uncertainty towards their brand
because the association allows for a transfer of uncertainty from the less reliable to the more
reliable brand (Geylani et al. 2008). In the late 1990s, the fnancial services provider H&R Block
partnered with Bristol-Myers Squibb in a joint promotion of tax services and Excedrin pain
relievers. No one got it.That is, the co-branding alliance failed because customers did not recognize any association between the two brands. On paper, the message seemed to make sense:
both Excedrin and H&R Block could relieve the headaches associated with completing taxes.
Unfortunately, customers instead perceived that H&R Block would cause migraines that only
Excedrin could cure.This difference between actual and perceived meanings may have seemed
diffcult to anticipate in advance, but the overall lack of product or brand ft contributed to the
failure of the alliance. Poor ft offers less positive attitude changes than co-branding with strong
ft; it can also induce deteriorating quality perceptions and a costly erosion of brand equity. If
a frm, however, decides to opt for a low-ftting co-branding alliance, benefcial behavioural
consequences might still be expected. For example, if partners forge an alliance with unrelated
brand concepts but develop a strong and persuasive argument, the co-branding arrangement
could be perceived as relevant (Samuelsen et al. 2015).This is because ‘misft’ co-branding alliances may trigger curiosity, which could lead to elaboration to resolve the low-ft perceptions.
In addition to brand ft, product ft refects perceived compatibility in terms of the function or quality of the products offered by the alliance frms. Two brands working together
should provide greater assurance about product quality than one brand on its own, and attitudes towards the brand alliance should improve even more at higher degrees of product ft.
Customers see that another frm is willing to put its reputation on the line, so they develop
greater trust in the product (Park et al. 1996). However, if no natural logic aligns the combined
products, customers cannot understand the reason for the partnership. In addition, product
ft matters more when the alliance lacks brand ft. That is, consumers look frst for image
congruence, and if it is missing, they try to fnd congruence on the product category level.
The selection of co-branding partners accordingly must take brand and product ft into
consideration.A frm might seek a complementary partner; Park and colleagues (1996) show
that the combination of two brands with complementary attribute levels leads to a composite
brand extension with a better attribute profle than either a direct extension of the dominant
brand or an extension with two favourable but non-complementary brands. Alternatively,
a frm might seek a partner with similar brand associations because the brands then evoke
equivalent responses from customers. For example, alliance managers in the mobile telephone
industry might forge co-branding alliances based on brand personality, such as sincerity, excitement, competence, sophistication and ruggedness (Chang 2009). If a frm appears exciting and
competent, it might search out a partner that is sincere, sophisticated and rugged because the
resulting complementary alliance would cover all the dimensions. Or it could fnd another
exciting and competent partner to forge a co-branding alliance with similar attributes.

Pre-existing brand attitudes
Attitudes are relatively stable psychological constructs, so pre-existing brand attitudes tend to
relate closely to post-exposure attitudes towards that same brand (Simonin and Ruth 1998).
Consequently, initial negative or positive attitudes towards an individual brand often transfer
to a co-brand, and vice versa. A frm with a favourable perceived brand image might thus
Co-branding alliances
179
forge a co-branding alliance with a frm that suffers from a less favourable perceived brand
image, assuming brand and product ft exist, to reconcile customers sympathetic with their
adverse perceptions. Positive attitudes towards individual brands get reinforced even further
when customers process favourable information about a co-branding alliance (e.g. advertisements) or enjoy positive experiences with a co-branded product. Thus a well-known, wellliked frm such as McDonald’s might signal the quality of a lesser-known brand, but it must
do so carefully because, in some cases, a low-quality image can have negative spillover effects
on its partner. McDonald’s needs thus to take great care in selecting which partners will
provide co-branded foods or beverages. Aligning with a perceived low-quality brand such as
Faygo could have negative effects on the McDonald’s brand, so instead, it allies with CocaCola.Thus the negative or positive pre-existing brand attitudes of consumers determine the
likelihood and direction of potential spillover effects in a co-branding alliance.

Brand equity
Brand equity refers to the set of assets and liabilities linked to a brand’s name or symbol,
which add to or subtract from the value provided by the branded product or service.These
associations defne the product in customers’ minds and have powerful effects on their buying behaviour. Co-branding alliances might increase the alliance partners’ brand equity. In
particular, pairing a well-known brand with a less-known brand will enhance the less-known
product’s equity (Washburn et al. 2000). However, such effects demand active management
if the co-branding alliance is to succeed because brand equity is associated with critical outcomes, including sales revenue, market growth and customer retention.Through careful brand
equity management, frms can capitalize on positive brand spillover effects and prevent negative implications. Management attention should focus particularly on four major elements of
brand equity, each of which has a powerful infuence on customer perceptions:
•
•
•
•
Brand awareness refers to the strength of the brand presence in customers’ minds. It
can vary from recognizing the brand to associating the brand actively with a product or
product family.
Brand loyalty refers to the tendency to be loyal to the brand, demonstrated in the form
of an intention to buy the brand whenever possible. High brand loyalty also means a
reduced tendency to switch between brands.This outcome is cost-effective because it is
much more diffcult and expensive to attract new customers than to keep existing ones.
Perceived brand quality indicates customers’ perceptions of the overall quality or superiority of a brand relative to alternative products and infuences their buying behaviours.
Brand associations refect non-product-related associations evoked by the brand and can
be actively infuenced by marketers. For example, to encourage a sporty, youthful image,
Nike frequently employs celebrity spokespersons such as Michael Jordan and Rafael
Nadal, but it also establishes alliances with Apple that grant it a technical, intelligent image.

In managing brand equity, a frm needs insight into the manner in which stakeholders construct
perceptions; the alliance partners could execute targeted marketing initiatives to enhance those
perceptions. For example, to increase brand equity, they might provide customers with greater
value to ensure the value they perceive exceeds the price they paid. In addition, high-quality
support services are likely to enhance brand equity; the provision of timely, reliable, accurate
information, perhaps through brochures, salespeople and online channels, also tends to increase
180
Co-branding alliances
customers’ perceptions. In service contexts, customers often associate employees who have superior skills with better service quality. Such management initiatives become even more important
when there are differences in brand equity between the partners. In particular, a co-branding
alliance may pose a potential risk for the stronger brand, whereas the weaker brand can enjoy
improved product quality perceptions without having to invest in the provision of better product
quality. Neglecting such inequalities over time may result in long-lasting damage to reputations.

Partners’ behaviour
Brand spillover effects often refect two primary attributes of partners’ behaviour (Votolato
and Unnava 2006): competence and morality. Competence is a frm’s ability to deliver information about the brand promise it makes to the customer. Negative information that arises in
this category might pertain to the failure to meet quality standards, according to consumers.
In a co-branding alliance, such failures adversely affect both partners’ reputations, but they also
often are due to the deliberate actions of managers. For example, partners might demand cost
savings and use substandard raw materials, such that they undermine product quality.
Morality is the representation of the frm’s ethics and principles. Negative outcomes
emerge when behaviours (such as dishonesty) confict with consumers’ established ethical
standards. For example, the use of child labour is perceived to be immoral, so companies that
engage in such methods suffer damaged reputations.When customers receive signals of such
immorality, they tend to dissociate from the brand; in co-branding alliances, partners must
continuously monitor their partner’s behaviours and initiate behaviour changes if necessary
to prevent negative spillover effects. In the mid-1990s, Intel’s poorly designed microprocessors
diluted its brand quality, which then spilled over to its partners Gateway and Dell, tarnishing
their quality images as well.A few years later, after Intel corrected the problem, it was able to
rebuild its quality image and allow Gateway and Dell to see a return on their investment in
partnering with the microprocessor manufacturer.
Research on negative information has suggested that information about companies’ morality and competence affect customers’ responses in different ways. Customers are more willing
to forgive competence failures than moral failures because moral standards represent hygiene
factors that should be respected by every individual (Brown and Dacin 1997).Wojciszke et al.
(1993) also argue that consumers are less forgiving of moral failures when the negative information pertains to a particular person.Votolato and Unnava (2006) fnd similarly that a brand
may be impervious to negative publicity surrounding its partner; it suffers ill effects only if
consumers come to believe that the focal brand knew of and condoned its partner’s behaviour.

Contractual provisions
In co-branding alliances, licensing of one or more trademarks between the parties is common.This approach helps reduce the adverse repercussions of negative spillover effects on a
frm’s brand and reputation. For example, licensing provisions may include guidelines for the
use of the respective brands, trademarks or other intellectual property, including the partners’
proprietary rights, quality controls, continuing rights upon termination, policing and enforcement. The licensing terms generally are reciprocal, specifying that the parties may use each
other’s trademarks, trade names, logos and copyrights solely to perform the obligations of the
co-branding alliance agreement.They also usually contain a clause that states that the use of
the respective marks must be in accordance with established policies and procedures.

Co-branding alliances
181
In addition, any trademark licensing deal embodies a contractual provision regarding the potential of product defect liability. Each company involved in a co-branding
alliance deal must know that affxing their brands to the product makes them liable for
product failures. Indemnifcation, warranty and termination clauses should be specifed
carefully if they are to provide any protections in worst-case product defect and liability
scenarios. Furthermore, exclusivity provisions may restrict co-branding partners’ rights
to enter into other third-party agreements. Such provisions typically prohibit any cobranding, co-marketing or other alliance with direct competitors in an attempt to avoid
any unwanted transfer of customers’ brand associations. Some co-branding alliance agreements also include restrictions on affliations with categories of services, products or
industries.The exit provisions then specify the conditions for ending the alliance by one
of the partners, which might include damaging actions that lead to possible negative spillover effects. Finally, an alliance contract might include penalties for broken conditions,
varying from limiting or correcting the damage to active communication or even rectifcation. Penalties also can be specifed in monetary terms, such as settling for damages
of negative spillovers.

Co-branding alliances: decision-making steps
The core logic underpinning co-branding alliances is that alliance partners combine their
brands, occasionally augmented with an existing product or service, to realize objectives such
as sales revenue and market share. However, unawareness of brand and product quality misfts,
preexisting brand attitudes, brand equity asymmetry and partner’s misconduct may cause
serious damage to a frm’s brand. Alliance managers thus need to fnd a way to exploit positive spillover effects while preventing the emergence of negative spillover effects.To provide
guidelines for forging win–win co-branding alliances, we next elaborate on specifc decisions
in each stage of the alliance development framework (see Figure 12.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During their strategic analyses, frms should decide whether a co-branding alliance is an
appropriate governance mode to realize their branding strategy. In addition to generic
rationales, such as transaction costs, resource complementarity, resource dependence and
learning, a frm may consider improved brand equity as its primary motive. The analysis
then should focus on the value of the existing brand, stakeholder perceptions and the anticipated benefts of co-branding. If the sole purpose of the branding strategy is to exploit the
combination of two brands, such as through a joint promotion, an alliance generally suffces.
However, if the physical integration of products is involved, frms may prefer more hierarchical control (e.g. merger or acquisition) as a means to govern the design, production and
marketing processes.
If a frm decides to forge a co-branding alliance, it must make decisions about whether it
will undertake joint promotion, joint advertisement, complementary use of products and/or
physical product integration. In developing their co-branding strategy, the partners should be
aware that familiar brands are better stimuli in brand alliance relationships because they have a
relatively higher degree of likeability among consumers due to their pre-existing associations
and possibly positive previous experiences. In addition, high awareness brands are recalled
more easily and generally signal high product quality and trustworthiness.

182
Co-branding alliances
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Extend governance mode selection criteria to include brand equity,
perceptions of stakeholders and anticipated co-branding benefits; but
in most instances, an alliance is preferred.
Decide on co-branding strategy: joint promotion, joint advertising,
joint complementary products or physical integration.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend partner selection criteria with partner’s track record, brand
equity, brand and product fit, and stakeholders’ (i.e. customers)
responses to co-branding.

3
Alliance
negotiation
4
Alliance
design
5
Alliance
launch
6
Alliance
management
FIGURE 12.1
Focus on branding and marketing specifications in terms of location,
brand adaptations, colors, size and so on.
Negotiation topics include license agreement, trademarks, existing
trademark policies and payment scheme.
Preferred governance form is non-equity based, but conditional
physical an equity-based arrangement could be preferred.
Specify contractual provisions for licensing, payments, exclusivity,
liability, branding and marketing specifications, penalties, exit
provisions, representations and warranties, terms and termination,
confidentiality, indemnification and disclaimers.
Communicate the scope of the co-branding initiative: explicate the
content and the nature of communication channels used.
Align partners branding policies, processes, procedures and way of
working to avoid conflicts between co-branding and individual
branding initiatives.
Invest in relational governance, install conflict resolution
mechanisms and stimulate flexibility to deal with limitations of
contracts.
Focus on the endorsement of the brands through repeated marketing
initiatives (i.e. create positive brand-spillover effects).

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing cobranding objectives (e.g. providing competent information, moral
integrity) and brand-spillover effects (e.g. positive or negative).

8
Alliance
termination
Avoid long-term agreements; typically, a co-branding agreement
consists of a short initial term with an option for renewals.
Assess the impact of termination on brand equity and initiate
corrective measures, including intensified promotion and advertising.

Alliance development framework: co-branding alliances
Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection stage, a frm selects a partner to establish a co-branding alliance.
The partner chosen should be reliable and responsible. Both companies should represent the
partnership responsibly, without scandals or public relations problems. For example, each frm
should be comfortable with its counterpart’s product-safety track records and original equipment manufacturer relationships, especially if it is responsible for manufacturing or bringing
goods to market. When the co-branded product features brands with inconsistent images,
Co-branding alliances
183
customers tend to regard it as inconsistent with the brands’ existing products and only slightly
revise their prior beliefs. The acts of each partner thus infuence customer bases powerfully;
a poor decision will result in failure and increase negative brand images. Anticipating both
positive and negative potential spillover effects can prevent costly mistakes, which implies that
partnering frms must evaluate both the actual monetary expenses involved in an alliance and
the potential costs associated with the possible negative effect on their brand. Brands tell consumers who made a product and therefore whom to punish if the product fails to perform up
to their expectations.The more positive the equity associated with a brand prior to the alliance, the higher the downside risk if the alliance partner proves to be a poor-quality provider.
Firms must carefully weigh the costs and benefts of any alliance and consider both best- and
worst-case scenarios during their due diligence process. Several questions can assist a frm in
its efforts to identify and select an appropriate partner:
•
•
•
•
•
What is the track record of this potential partner? Its existing brand may have prompted
some association in the past, which could limit the co-branding alliance possibilities. In
addition, partnering with a frm that has exhibited moral failures is likely to have negative
repercussions.
What is the brand equity of the potential partner, in terms of brand awareness, quality,
loyalty and association? Partnering with a low-equity brand may create an uneven distribution of positive and negative spillover effects.
Which brand personality dimensions are most important in a potential partner? Does the
potential brand combination constitute a complementary or supplementary brand ft?
How will customers react to the combination? Are customers able to associate the
brands? If (potential) customers fail to see the connection between two brands, they will
not understand the logic behind the partnership, which can ultimately lead to confusion
and damage to the brand.
If products are involved, how will customers react to product ft, and to what extent do
product designs need to be altered to develop a valuable market proposition?

Step 3: alliance negotiation
Consistent with generic guidelines, alliance negotiations should be integrative and rely on soft
tactics. However, any frm might want to add branding and marketing specifcations to the
agenda to ensure they determine the appearance and positioning of the respective brands in
terms of location, colour, size and proximity, as well as any needed modifcation to existing
brands. Other important topics to cover include the types of marketing initiatives employed (e.g.
direct marketing), the use of each party’s customer data and media campaign planning (e.g. television, print advertising, promotions). In addition, negotiations need to focus on the content and
nature of licence and trademark provisions; co-branding alliances generally involve the licensing
of at least one of the trademarks between the parties. Additional topics might cover payment
schemes, existing licence and trademark policies, or the partner’s marketing contributions.

Step 4: alliance design
A co-branding alliance design can be the key to alliance success or failure. If the sole purpose
of the branding strategy is to exploit the combination of two brands, perhaps through joint
promotion, a non-equity arrangement generally suffces. However, if a physical integration of
184
Co-branding alliances
products is needed, alliance partners could prefer more hierarchical control, such as through
equity arrangements. The alliance governance form and management control mechanism
should be consistent with generic guidelines, though the partners should place a particular focus on contractual provisions seeking to limit the adverse impact of negative spillover
effects. Finally, the following contractual provisions are preferable ingredients of a successful
co-branding alliance contract:
•
•
•
•
•
Licensing provisions that cover guidelines for the use of the respective brands, trademarks
and other intellectual property, including those for proprietary rights, quality control,
continuing rights upon termination and policing and enforcement of rights.
Product defect liability provisions, such as indemnifcation and warranty and termination
clauses that provide protection in worst-case scenarios.
Exclusivity provisions prohibiting co-branding, co-marketing or alliances with direct
competitors.
Penalty provisions, varying from limitations to or corrections of damage to public reputation through active communication, rectifcation and fnancial compensation.
Exit provisions that specify the conditions in which alliance can be ended, such as when
one partner engages in damaging actions and induces negative spillover effects.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking a branding alliance view, general alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be
aware of two points. First, the alliance launch team should pay attention to specifc branding
practices that have been built prior to the frm entering. The partners may have developed
specifc branding requirements, and the alliance launch managers should create clarity and
reconcile any operational differences. For example, the partner may have different procedures
and templates to communicate their brand. Second, staff involved may identify strongly with
their own brands and resist efforts to co-brand, or not be convinced that co-branding may
lead to synergetic effects. The launch managers should deal with these hostile dispositions
through dialogue and convey the motives for co-branding.To accomplish these two tasks, it
is critical alliance launch managers act as advocates of the co-branding alliance, set up liaisons
between marketing and sales staff, and work with them to defne and fne-tune the partners’
co-branding proposition.

Step 6: alliance management
Although alliance contracts can increase the predictability of partner behaviour, detailed
contracts also signal distrust, such that they may become a liability in co-branding alliances.
Extensive contracts undermine initial trust building, reduce moral entanglements between
partners and allow for opportunism. Investing in relational norms and capital is therefore
critical once the co-branding alliance has been executed. In addition, interdependency
between the collaborating organizations is greater than the initial scope of an alliance might
reveal. For example, acts undertaken elsewhere in a partnering frm might have adverse
effects on public awareness and stimulate conficts. A closer interaction between collaborating parties can help ensure that they communicate a consistent message. However, their different organizational and cultural backgrounds are likely to give rise to varying views on the
Co-branding alliances
185
activities needed to strengthen reputations.Thus the managerial climate must leave room for
active communication and sense making.
During the course of the co-branding alliance, partners may initiate joint efforts to endorse
the endeavour. However, managing public awareness and strengthening reputation is not an
exact science. To increase positive effects, the co-branding connection needs the benefts of
repetition, appearing several times in advertising.Advertisers also should be aware of the special features of this strategy, such as the appropriate timing of the co-branding presentation
or the proper ordering of images to achieve maximum brand association formulation. For
example, to increase the chance of positive associations, a (joint) product should be presented
before the brand(s) in a joint advertisement.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
Co-branding alliances are established to reach certain goals; alliance evaluation supports the
timely revision of activities or even the decision to terminate before negative effects become
overwhelming. A performance metric system might be augmented with indicators that also
tap the positive and negative effects of brand spillovers. For example, some indicators might
determine customers’ perceptions of the co-brand, satisfaction, loyalty and retention. In addition, performance metric systems could feature indicators of the partner frms’ behaviour in
terms of their morality and information competence. Another set of metrics could capture
changes in partners’ brand equity elements: brand name awareness, brand loyalty, perceived
quality and brand associations.

Step 8: alliance termination
The length of the agreement and the termination provisions are important because they
affect the parties’ ability to escape from co-branding alliance arrangements that turn out to be
harmful or that simply are not as effective or proftable as expected.Typically, a co-branding
alliance agreement consists of an initial term and the option for renewal. The initial term
should be relatively short (e.g. two to three years), so that the brands are not tied together for
an excessive period, but long enough to establish the co-branding strategy and realize its success or potential. Incorporating exit provisions in the alliance contract also enables partners to
end the alliance without creating anger or unfavourable conditions.

Summary
Co-branding alliances combine brands and often the products of allying frms in an attempt
to realize marketing objectives such as market share, sales revenue and customer retention.
Such marketing solutions may stimulate quality perceptions and provide reassurances about
the true quality of a product because brand names communicate a certain level of quality to
consumers. A combination of one brand name with a reliable partner in a co-branding alliance reduces the risk to customers of buying a product. However, an ill-designed co-branding
alliance will have severe repercussions for alliance partners, especially if customers transfer
their negative associations to each of the partner brands. Such associations fail primarily
because the value is not equitable for both brands in the relationship, the brands’ values do not
match or consumers have trouble understanding the alliance strategy.Through careful partner
selection and contractual provisions though, partner frms can reduce the risks associated
186
Co-branding alliances
with co-branding alliances. Selecting partners with good brand and product ft and pursuing
continuous investments in brand equity increase the chances of success, even as licence agreements, exclusivity provisions and termination clauses help protect the frm from liability issues
and reputational damage.

CASE: HEINEKEN–JAMES BOND1
On 15 February 1864, Gerard Adriaan Heineken (1841–1893) purchased ‘De Hooiberg’
(‘The Haystack’) brewery in Amsterdam, which would become the Heineken brewery. In
1875, Heineken won the Medaille D’Or at the International Maritime Exposition in Paris and
became the biggest beer exporter from the Netherlands to France. After Prohibition was
lifted in 1933, Heineken became the frst European beer to be imported to the United States.
Since then, Heineken has grown to become the third largest brewer in the world, owning
more than 165 breweries in more than 70 countries. Heineken produces more than 180 million hectolitres of beer annually.
Almost directly after its foundation, Heineken deployed an active marketing and sales
strategy. Premium quality has always been one of the core features of Heineken. Given the
poor general hygiene in the mid-1800s, Gerard Adriaan Heineken pledged to clients that
he would supply them with a clean and safe product. This provided him and his new company with its frst peak of growth. Marketing became exceptionally important when Freddy
Heineken took control of the company. After learning the trades of marketing and sales in
the United States, Freddy Heineken returned to the Netherlands. In the late 1940s, Heineken
set up a ‘publicity department’ to persuade consumers to drink Heineken beer. Freddy
Heineken understood that marketing had to be simple and consistent. He introduced wellknown and short slogans and started updating Heineken’s packaging to be more in tune
with the company’s vision.
While Heineken had become a global company, it had not become a global brand. In the
1980s and 1990s, local trademarks were available in many markets, and Heineken’s positioning as a premium lager required further support. In many places in the world, beer was still
considered a bestial product, and wine was considered too ‘decent’. To support Heineken’s
global positioning, interest was devoted to using James Bond as an advertising platform.
Based on the novels of Ian Fleming, James Bond movies started to be produced regularly,
starting with Dr. No in 1962. This represented the start of the most successful series of movies in history and attracted the attention of advertisers. Although marketing effectiveness
is exceptionally hard to measure, companies are increasingly defned by their reputation.
This, combined with a strong brand, differentiates companies in the eyes of the public.
For Heineken, James Bond offered a global advertising platform reaching the desired target
groups: cosmopolitan males who could identify with James Bond. James Bond is synonymous with high-quality goods, which underlines Heineken’s reputation as a premium lager.
Heineken is a logical partner for James Bond since the character James Bond enjoys the occasional alcoholic beverage, although this was generally a vodka martini, famously ‘shaken,
not stirred’. Brand cohesiveness between Heineken and James Bond was less obvious and
posed a risk in the partnership between James Bond and Heineken.
The partnership between Heineken and James Bond dates back to 1997, when Heineken
participated in the movie Tomorrow Never Dies. In this movie, James Bond uses a truck loaded
with Heineken crates as a ramp to get his bike back on street level. Heineken commercials
Co-branding alliances
187
have been produced in which John Cleese participates as Q, receiving a phone call through
a Heineken bottle. Heineken was again involved in the movie The World Is Not Enough. This
was the company’s frst global campaign, and it introduced the slogan ‘not everything
should be shaken or stirred’. Satisfed with the results, Heineken has participated in all subsequent Bond movies, although it wasn’t until 2012 that James Bond himself enjoyed a
Heineken, in the movie Skyfall, causing disturbance with James Bond purists who argued
that the stylish character of James Bond could not be combined with ‘ordinary lager’.
However, the risks of limited brand cohesiveness were effectively managed by Heineken.
Using a keen marketing strategy, the movie Skyfall coincided with the London Olympics of
2012, of which Heineken was the offcial lager supplier. Heineken sales reportedly increased
by 5.3 per cent.
The production of the James Bond flm Spectre required a budget of US$350 million.
To fnance the flm, reliance on sponsorship was crucial. According to the flm’s star, Daniel
Craig, ‘the simple fact is that without them [advertisers], we couldn’t do it’. Heineken’s
partnership with Spectre implied an investment of US$167 million. The vast majority of this
amount was a countertrade in joint promotion: Heineken does not pay the flm producers but invests in movie marketing, which translates into free publicity for the flm makers.
For Heineken, the Spectre campaign was the brand’s largest global marketing platform of
2015. Part of this campaign involved James Bond again enjoying a Heineken in the flm
itself. Next, Heineken was allowed exclusive rights to using Daniel Craig in a commercial.
For its digital Spectre campaign, Heineken took the world’s frst ever selfe from space. For
the ‘Spyfe’, Heineken partnered with Urthecast to take ultra-HD imagery using its camera on the Deimos satellite, which was orbiting 600 kilometres above the Earth’s surface.
Via a relay of technology, Heineken created a selfe for attendees who had been recruited
from around the world. The Spyfe content was customized for each attendee of the topsecret experiential event, sending the material directly to their mobile devices for use on
social media. Heineken also allowed Bond fans to get exclusive access to Spectre content
through the estimated half a billion bottles bearing the Spectre logo that were sold around
the world. By scanning the Heineken logo, fans could unlock content with Daniel Craig
and behind-the-scenes footage. The Heineken ‘limited editions’ all had James Bond–style
packaging. However, product placement and co-branding arrangements in flms are not
without risks. Audiences are increasingly sceptical about such strategies. Research suggests that when product placement becomes too prominent, it affects attitudes negatively
because viewers become aware of a deliberate selling attempt. Product placement can also
lower audiences’ evaluations of the focal entertainment product (the flm or the show).
Active management of the portfolio of partners ensures that brand cohesiveness is guaranteed and the partnership delivers its intended value. With regard to the collaboration
between Heineken and James Bond, the introduction of Heineken in the movie Skyfall created a surge of complaints. However, according to Heineken offcials, the campaign was
successful. The movie was also highly successful, making US$1.1 billion in ticket sales
compared to costs of $200 million. In 2021, the latest James Bond movie was released: No
Time to Die. The promotion activities included a commercial featuring Daniel Craig, who
slowly pours a glass of Heineken extending the gratifcation of the frst sip. The rationale
behind the commercial originated in an experiment, where participants would be offered
a Heineken 0.0 (i.e. alcohol free), but were served with time delays varying from 0 to 30
minutes. The results suggested that participants experienced extreme satisfaction after a
20-minute wait.

188
Co-branding alliances
As for Heineken, for many companies, association with James Bond bears signifcant
value in terms of reputation and positioning of their brand. Examples of iconic brands that
have been associated with James bond include Omega watches, Aston Martin and Tom
Ford. These companies have been willing to invest signifcant amounts of money to further
increase their promotional effects.

Questions
1
2
3
Explain how the Heineken and James Bond brands reinforce one another positively (e.g.
have brand and product ft).
Explain what risks this alliance entails for Heineken with regard to negative brand
spillovers.
Heineken received complaints about this co-branding alliance. Explain why they
decided to continue and expand it?

Note
1 Cooper (2012); Engbers (2021); McCann (2013); Zagt (2015).

13
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCES
Global markets, which represent the convergence of consumer demand across different societies; lowered barriers to trade and investment; the alignment of government policies; and
key technological developments in information processing, communications and transportation have prompted frms to adopt internationalization strategies to maintain their competitive advantage. Within the portfolio of competitive instruments a frm can use to discover
and exploit international opportunities, international alliances have become quite prominent
(Beamish and Lupton 2016).They often enable frms to produce goods less expensively but
with the same quality level, which improves their cost structure and/or helps them penetrate new markets to improve their profts.Although international alliances thus have grown
increasingly popular, their failure rate also is extremely high. Clashing cultures are the most
widely cited reasons for such failures, though cultural tensions often intertwine with other
deal breakers, such as unrealistic expectations or distrust. That is, the international environments in which international alliances operate may exacerbate adverse situations or create
great opportunities; in either case, their management is critical. The frst section details this
unique challenge.Then we elaborate on the nature of national culture (second section) and
discuss cross-cultural management approaches (third section). In the fourth section, we use
our alliance development framework to highlight key management issues before concluding
with a summary and a case illustration.

The international alliance challenge
International alliances (see Table 13.1), which refer to partnerships between parties located in
different countries, are forged for multiple reasons (Beamish and Lupton 2016; Glaister and
Buckley 1996; Li et al. 2013; Zahoor et al. 2023).They offer frms opportunities to gain access
to knowledge and capabilities not currently controlled or available within their home country.
International alliances also function as vehicles to enable frms to enter developing markets
that may have restrictive conditions for foreign investment or gain a signifcant presence and
greater market penetration more rapidly in new markets.Through international alliances, the
partners create common and global platforms for products and services, as well as supplementing their knowledge bases with the new knowledge possessed by the foreign partner, such
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-13
190
International alliances
TABLE 13.1 Examples of international alliances
Description
Tokio Marine–Bolttech
In 2022, Japan’s largest non-life insurance group Tokio Marine formed
a capital and business alliance with Singapore-headquartered InsurTech
company, Bolttech.The partners aim is to realize the global expansion of
embedded insurance and innovative insurance binding processes through a
unique digital platform. In collaboration with Bolttech,Tokio Marine will
provide new products and services on a global scale.

DSM–Padang & Co
In 2019, DSM powered by Padang & Co, established the Bright Science
Hub in order to connect technology startups, entrepreneurs and other
partners to foster innovation that can deliver positive impact in the
Asia-Pacifc region.

Lendico–PostFinance
In 2016, the Germany-based Lendico and the Swizz PostFinance launched
a joint venture, established in Switzerland.The aim of the joint venture is
to provide Swiss small businesses with a modern alternative to traditional
bank fnancing.The two partners are contributing their complementary
expertise in customer contact and lending and repayment processes.

Sources: DSM (2020); Martino (2010); PRNewswire (2016); Tokio Marine (2022).

as when they integrate knowledge from different areas of science and technology to develop
more radical innovations (Lane et al. 2001). It is important to note, however, that motives for
international alliances may vary with the type of alliance.Whereas, for example, Li et al. (2013)
show that low-tech frms use international alliances to share resources, costs and risks, in
contrast to high-tech frms who use such arrangements to mitigate environmental dynamism,
Choi and Yeniyurt (2015) report that frms are more likely to form R&D alliances where
there are similar levels of innovation infrastructure between countries of partnering frms.
Despite the good reasons for forging international alliances, they are inherently unstable
because the partners lack shared cultural norms and values (Christoffersen 2013; Meschi 2005;
Park and Ungson 1997)—that is, these alliances feature cultural distance. Increasing cultural
distance undermines the partners’ interpretation of each other’s strategic intents and tends to
hamper their effective communication during alliance negotiations (Rao and Schmidt 1998).
Many frms thus adopt alliance designs characterized by excessive governance and control to
deal with the uncertainties related to different regulations, work-related values or management practices (Steensma et al. 2000). Even when the frms focus on governance, however,
they often fail to establish effective control processes and procedures to encourage cooperation or mitigate resistance to change (Inkpen and Beamish 1997). Moreover, cultural distance
tends to impede the building of trust as the partnership develops, along with inter-frm learning and knowledge sharing (Aulakh et al. 1996; Parkhe 1991). In general, cultural distance thus
appears to affect negatively the strategic, tactical and operational processes that underlie the
formation and maintenance of international alliances.
Yet some studies paint a rosier picture, in which international alliances develop into longlasting, productive partnerships. Park and Ungson (1997) fnd that international joint ventures between Japanese and US parents survived longer than those between two US parents,
perhaps because their prior relationships had already stimulated trust and enabled inter-frm
learning, which counter-balanced any cross-cultural differences.Aulakh et al. (1996) show that
investing in relational norms and mutual trust increases the likelihood of high-performing
International alliances
191
international partnerships. Brouthers and Bamossy (2006) reaffrm these fndings and reveal
that alliance processes, such as trust and commitment, constitute an important condition for
developing successful international joint ventures.Although cultural distance is thus a prominent and potentially destructive factor, cross-cultural experience and management can also
help frms overcome their cultural adversities and enable them to exploit cultural differences.
Insights into the nature of national cultures and cross-cultural management are thus critical
for successful international alliances (López-Duartea et al. 2016).

The nature of national culture
National culture is ubiquitous, multi-dimensional, complex and pervasive. It consists of values, behavioural norms, beliefs, language, rituals governing behaviour, patterns of action, shared
expectations and responses to the environment by a group that constitutes the nation. Deeply set
values, norms and priorities are thus common to members of a nation (Hofstede 1991), acquired
early in life through a person’s primary socialization in families, schools and social interactions.
A country’s culture permeates all aspects of life within that society—including the norms, values
and behaviours of managers in its companies. It also constitutes an ethical habit, nurtured by repetition, tradition and example, which is manifested through images, habits and social opinions.
In this role, it regulates the behaviour of people, often through communication and decision
making. Because national culture is learned, however, people should be able to adapt their mental programming, regardless of their national culture. This point is important because forging
international alliances requires the managers involved to adapt their cultural dispositions to deal
with cultural differences. National cultural frameworks can assist managers in this endeavour.

National cultural dimensions
Of the various national culture frameworks, including those by Trompenaars (1993) and the
GLOBE study (House 2004), we turn to Hofstede’s (1991) well-known framework for this
chapter. Hofstede’s framework has been criticized as outdated and specifc to the context in
which data was collected, but recent studies still maintain that the positions of the countries
he established are relatively stable (Taras et al. 2009). Furthermore, although the development and application of various cultural frameworks remain constantly subject to controversy,
they make similar contributions: namely, a better understanding of the relationship between
people’s cultural dispositions and their behaviour. Hofstede (1991) initially identifed four
cultural dimensions—individualism–collectivism, masculinity–femininity, power distance and
uncertainty avoidance—to which he later added a ffth (Hofstede and Bond 1988), time orientation (Table 13.2).
Individualism–collectivism indicates the relative closeness of interpersonal relationships.
It thus anticipates fundamental issues about individual motivation and place (and the management thereof), as well as about the organization and functioning of society as a whole. It
pertains to people’s attitudes towards relationships. People from individualistic countries, characterized by loose interpersonal ties, tend to emphasize their self-interest. But when the ties
among individuals are tight (i.e. collectivism), their concern lies with the group interest.Thus
alliance managers from collectivistic countries tend to be more loyal to the alliance, whereas
those from individualistic countries consider the alliance as a means to an end.
The masculinity–femininity cultural dimension pertains to norms regarding an achievement motivation versus quality of life. Masculine cultures convey norms that emphasize the
192
International alliances
TABLE 13.2 Hofstede’s fve cultural dimensions
Description
Characteristics
Example
Individualism–
collectivism
In individualistic cultures, relations with
others should be rational, based on
personal goals and governed by cost–beneft
calculations. In collectivistic cultures, relations
are organized to protect group harmony
and save face and avoid embarrassment.

Alliance managers from individualistic
countries (e.g. US) tend to focus on
individual achievements and rights;
their counterparts from collectivistic
cultures (e.g.Turkey) tend to
emphasize joint achievements.

Masculinity–
femininity
Masculine societies convey norms that
emphasize the need for autonomy,
competitiveness and assertive actions
to achieve materialistic goals with a
preference for extrinsic rewards. Feminine
cultures convey norms that emphasize the
need for collaboration and relationships.
The dominant norms are caring for
others and quality of life, with preference
granted to intrinsic rewards.

Alliance managers from masculine
countries (e.g. Italy) tend to focus on
decisive and daring behaviours and
resolve conficts through fghting;
their counterparts from feminineoriented cultures (e.g. Netherlands)
tend to emphasize consensus behaviour
and resolve conficts through
compromising.

Uncertainty
avoidance
In cultures with high uncertainty avoidance,
people seek to reduce uncertainty by
planning everything carefully and relying
on rules and regulations. In countries with
low uncertainty avoidance, people are more
willing to accept uncertainty and not afraid
to take risks.

Alliance managers from high
uncertainty avoidance countries
(e.g. Belgium) tend to focus on
incremental improvement steps guided
by blueprints; their counterparts from
low uncertainty avoidance cultures (e.g.
Singapore) tend to accept uncertainty.

Power distance
In cultures with high power distance, a
belief exists that power should govern
relationships; inequality in power is the
basis of societal order. In cultures with low
power distance, the belief is that power is a
necessary evil that should be minimized, and
people should treat one another as equals.

Alliance managers from high power
distance countries (e.g. France) tend to
focus on centralized decision making;
their counterparts from low power
distance cultures (e.g. Denmark)
tend to focus on empowerment and
subscribe to management by consensus.

Time
orientation
In cultures with a long-term time
orientation, ordering relationships by
status and observing this order, thrift and
a sense of shame are important. In cultures
with a short-term orientation, personal
stability, protecting face, quick results and
unimportance of status are typical.

Alliance managers from short-termoriented countries (e.g. US) tend to
focus on immediate (fnancial) results;
their counterparts from long-termoriented cultures (e.g. China) tend
to focus on long-term (strategic)
outcomes.

Sources: Hofstede (1991); Hofstede and Bond (1988).

need for autonomy, competitiveness and assertiveness to achieve materialistic goals. In contrast, in countries with a feminine culture, the dominant norms emphasize sympathy, collaboration, the importance of relationships and helping others.Alliance managers from masculine
countries tend to be more proactive in imposing their alliance solutions, if necessary with the
risk of conficts, on their counterparts, whereas managers from feminine countries tend to
propose consensus-based solutions.

International alliances
193
Power distance refers to the distribution of power within a country, as well as how societies
deal with inequalities in social status. In countries with high power distance, citizens tend to
accept such power inequality, whereas in low power distance countries, they emphasize equality.
Therefore alliance managers from countries with high power distance tend to prefer centralization, whereas managers from low power distance countries tend to focus on empowerment.
Uncertainty avoidance pertains to people’s inclination to reduce or cope with uncertainty
about the future and deal with risk. High uncertainty avoidance indicates that the future is viewed
as a threat, so alliance managers from these countries are less inclined to take risks. Managers from
low uncertainty avoidance countries, however, tend to engage in more risky endeavours.
Finally, the time dimension entails a long- versus short-term orientation distinction, or
the degree to which a society embraces a persistent devotion to traditional, forward-thinking
values.With a long-term orientation, a society tends to focus on the future, but a short-term
focus indicates that people focus on the present. Thus alliance managers from long-termoriented countries tend to be more patient with alliance progress, but their counterparts from
short-term-oriented countries demand immediate results.
When people from different countries work together, conficts and opportunities are likely.
For example, an alliance manager with an individualistic orientation might make decisions
to prioritize the protection of individual profts, as justifed by utilitarian principles. His or
her counterpart from a collectivist culture recognizes the group as the dominant structure
and therefore makes decisions to achieve consensus, protect group harmony and save face. In
an international alliance, an individualistic alliance manager tends to be less concerned about
process discrepancies (i.e. distrust) than the collectivist counterpart.The former manager also
exhibits a low desire to understand the causes for distrust or initiate corrective measures.The
collectivist manager in the meantime is viewing the process discrepancy as a barrier to alliance progress that must be resolved.These contrasting views might result in decision-making
conficts or, if properly managed, constructive dialogues. In an alliance, cultural differences
therefore can function as (1) barriers to cooperation, (2) challenges to be addressed or (3)
windows to unexpected opportunities (Child and Faulkner 1998; Christoffersen 2013).

Culture as a barrier
An international alliance brings people from different countries together in a working relationship. If they identify strongly with their national cultures, collaborating with members
of other nations may constitute a threat. The participants in the international alliance may
then resist changes to their structures and practices, especially those initiated to advance the
alliance’s progress. For example, considerable diffculties arise in international alliances featuring frms that manage and organize their employees according to masculine versus feminine
orientations. In the former, managers emphasize goal achievement, completion and management action. In the latter, they will focus on mutual collaboration and a supportive working
climate. It is diffcult to reconcile these contrasting orientations. In turn, the cultural differences signal a loss or low level of control and a source of fundamental confict, which leads
to misunderstanding and disagreements. At a superfcial level, cultural differences may entail
simple misunderstandings, originating in language and behaviour differences (Joshi and Lahiri
2015), which are relatively easy to address as long as people are sensitive and aware. Even if
a foreign alliance partner recommends different management practices, joint, open communication and dialogue can help resolve any cultural differences. At a more fundamental
level though, such differences refect conficts in values and thus may bar the development of
194
International alliances
successful international alliances. If socially embedded values clash, they can seriously damage
interpersonal collaboration.

Culture as a challenge
Beyond their roles as barriers to cooperation, cultural differences confront managers with
unique challenges, including the very design of the alliance. Firms that face seemingly incomprehensible cultural differences tend to adopt excessive governance forms to obtain protection and safeguards against exchange hazards. Gulati and Singh (1998) report that the country
of origin often determines the choice between minority-equity investment and joint ventures, according to the partners’ different perceptions of time. For example, Japanese partners
tend to adopt long time horizons when dealing with exchange hazards, in contrast with their
European and US counterparts. Choi and Contractor (2016) show that whereas the likelihood of using a more-integrated alliance governance mode decreases as the difference or
‘distance’ between nations of the partner frms increases in terms of human capital and cultural distance, greater geographic and institutional difference is positively associated with the
selection of more integrated alliance governance modes. Brouthers and Bamossy (2006) fnd
that initial formal control by a foreign partner often benefts alliance progress, particularly if
supplemented with social controls, but then as the alliance progresses, management control
must be shared. Moreover, maintaining dominant formal control tends to result in underperformance by the international alliance (Fryxell et al. 2002).
Other challenges pertain to alliance negotiation and execution; cultural distance increases
the likelihood of premature breakdown due to cultural conficts. Developing a negotiation
climate characterized by mutual trust is diffcult for negotiators from different countries
because the probability of mutual misunderstandings, miscommunications, erroneous interpretations of proposals and personal offence tends to increase. For example, US managers
might adopt soft negotiation tactics when dealing with foreign partners, but as their cultural
distance increases, the likelihood of the use of hard tactics increases because the managers perceive higher risks of opportunistic conduct and non-compliance (Rao and Schmidt 1998). In
the alliance execution stage, cultural differences may result in considerable operational problems. If people involved in the alliance focus on different priorities, as refecting their cultural
orientations, any breakdown in relational norms and capital, interpersonal communication, or
inter-frm learning will inhibit these partners’ ability to work together. Many alliance managers just assume that their counterparts will respond similarly to a problem, but managers from
masculine Japan are quick to adopt destructive response strategies, whereas managers from
collectivist Turkey prefer more passive responses (Furrer et al. 2012). Similarly, managers from
individualistic cultures perceive confict as a constructive and inevitable part of alliances, so
they use dialectical inquiry and play the devil’s advocate to improve decision making (Parkhe
1991). Managers from collectivistic countries would never embrace such tactics, which reduce
their ability to save face and lead to vigorous and inappropriate-seeming conficts. Furthermore, developing and implementing performance metric systems that accommodate both
partners’ interests is diffcult in the face of vast cultural differences (Büchel and Thuy 2001).

Culture as opportunity
Differences in national culture also may constitute an opportunity. Cultural diversity enables
alliance partners to build on their cultural strengths by combining the advantageous aspects
International alliances
195
of their existing cultures into a new, improved culture. The establishment of NUMMI by
Toyota and General Motors is a well-known example of the US car manufacturer’s attempt
to learn about the lean manufacturing methods being used so successfully in Japan. Meanwhile,Toyota gained access to information about the competitive strategies of its partner and
developments within the US auto industry (Doz and Hamel 1998).Yeheskel and colleagues
(2001) fnd that certain cultural differences (e.g. in masculinity and power distance) have
negative impacts on joint venture performance, whereas others, such as individualism and
uncertainty avoidance, produce positive impacts.To explain this divergence, they argue that
if perceived properly, cultural differences offer a valuable asset. If alliance managers recognize the potential challenges of working with foreign partners, they should be more willing
to expend effort to avoid misunderstandings, such that differences in national culture then
lead to high-level communication and more sustained collaboration (Shenkar and Zeira
1992).When regarding cultural differences as an opportunity, the partners aim to harvest the
benefts of the diversity in alliance partners’ cultures while also building effective bridges
between them.
Exploiting cultural opportunities is not always an appropriate course of action, however.
Culture provides people with a sense of social cohesion (i.e. reference point) and makes them
accept shared goals. Firms must therefore consider carefully the form of their international
alliance. If it will entail a stand-alone entity (e.g. joint venture), partners may beneft from
building a separate alliance identity that intentionally aims to meld the strengths of both
partners’ national cultures. However, if an alliance represents an investment opportunity, the
transfer of cultural values and norms may not outweigh the potential benefts of cultural
integration. Furthermore, even if alliance partners are willing to accommodate their partners’
national cultures, they still need the opportunity to maintain their own identity.
Firms engaged in international alliances thus confront a unique challenge: they must
counter the negative consequences of cultural differences, such as the greater risk of
opportunistic conduct, by frst recognizing the potential for cultural barriers and thereby
initiating measures to avoid detrimental implications. Simultaneously, they should identify
opportunities to exploit cultural diversity. To this end, alliance managers need to understand the extent to which cultural differences exist (see Box 13.1), identify whether they
BOX 13.1 HIGH AND LOW CONTEXT CULTURES
A more parsimonious classifcation of national cultures entails the distinction between
high and low context cultures. In a high context culture, information remains tacit,
and interpretation requires an understanding of the situational context. In a low
context culture, information is primarily communicated in codifed form, and the
burden of interpretation is placed on the receiver. Most Asian cultures fall at the high
context end of this continuum; North American cultures fall at the low context end.
International alliances between partners that are both from either high or low context cultures are likely to experience only minor cultural adversities, but partnerships
that span these categories will tend to sufer substantial cultural conficts. In the latter
case, alliance managers must adapt their communication styles to accommodate the
partners.

196
International alliances
constitute a threat or opportunity and assess the degree of infuence of alliance acculturation.That is, partner frms need to decide to create a hybrid culture in which the partner’s
cultures are melted into a new cultural construction, build a cooperative culture in which
the partners’ cultures coexist alongside one another or create a new culture from scratch
(Dasi-Rodriguez and Pardo-del-Val 2015). Following this decision, appropriate crosscultural management can then transform cultural differences into assets, which increase
the probability of alliance success.

Managing international alliances
The management of international alliances includes activities designed to reconcile differences in the alliance partners’ cultures—a prerequisite of the long-term viability of an
international alliance. When different national cultures enter into a workable relationship,
the alliance partners can realize their objectives with minimal tension, confict or disagreement. This point does imply, however, that the original cultures should be reconciled. The
more national cultures differ, the greater their impact on alliance development, and the more
diffcult and time-consuming management becomes. If national cultures in an alliance are
deeply embedded, their attempted reconciliation with other cultures will result in resistance
to change.Therefore, the active management of cultural diversity is important in alliances, and
managerial attention should focus on (1) building cultural competence, (2) partner selection,
(3) alliance manager selection and (4) the work climate.

Cultural competence
In an alliance context, cultural competence refers to the ability to interact effectively with
people of different cultures, and it comprises three components. First, alliance managers must
become aware of their own cultural worldview; such consciousness of their personal reactions to people who are different improves their attitudes towards cultural differences. Prior
to forging an international alliance, managers must make an effort to assess the nature of their
partner’s cultures and the potential for adversities. Second, knowledge of different cultural
practices helps alliance managers maintain consistency between their attitudes and behaviours.
With cultural awareness, they can identify the implications of their (unintended) actions.
Third, cross-cultural skills, such as developing cultural competences, result in an ability to
understand, communicate with and effectively interact with people across cultures. Neglecting cultural differences instead results in highly unpredictable consequences. The active and
constructive interaction between counterparts eases cultural harmonization and integration
because a frm with a good cultural competence can diagnose and remedy cultural differences, which enables cultural integration.
Cultural competences might be built through training or education in cross-cultural
management. Training should improve managers’ cultural awareness, sensitizing them to
their own interpretive schemes, as well as those of their partner. It also reduces managers’ natural tendency to process information automatically so that they do not make
instantaneous judgements about their partner’s intentions. Cross-cultural sensitivity and
language competence in particular can increase managers’ understanding of partner needs
and interests, resulting in high-quality cross-cultural interactions. Other forms of benefcial
education include training in the partner’s country for both sides, or personnel exchanges
International alliances
197
between the alliance partners. In addition, a frm may learn from its prior international
alliances and coach other alliance managers using these prior experiences. Once frms
gain more experience in international business, they are more confdent about operating
abroad, more willing to take risks and better able to manage international alliances, even
to the extent that enhanced international alliance experiences dissuade (SME) frms to
forge international alliances (Arranz et al. 2016). Yet, host country–specifc experience is
especially useful when it comes to strategic decisions, managing local labour and communicating with customers, suppliers and stakeholders. Rewards are key when building
and using such cultural competences. Firms often provide training but never mandate full
participation or reward employees who apply the training to their work.To manage international alliances successfully, it is utterly necessary that the involved staff and management
gain suffcient understanding of their partner’s cultural dispositions and recognize the value
of cultural diversity.

Partner selection
Partner selection confronts frms with a dilemma (Meschi 1997): is it better to collaborate with a partner with a compatible national culture, or seize an opportunity with a partner that is less compatible but immediately available? Investing too much time in seeking
out a compatible partner may allow the motivation underpinning the alliance to expire.
But collaborating with a partner with an incompatible culture could jeopardize any alliance
outcomes anyway. For example, the immediate realization of short-term fnancial benefts
is often diffcult when cultural differences exist. Harmonizing cultural differences requires
time and devoted management attention, but when the partners share at least certain aspects,
their cultural integration can be accelerated. During partner selection, alliance managers thus
might consider other partner selection motives. Foreign partners tend to contribute distinctive resources (Hitt et al. 2000), increasing the risk of exchange hazards (i.e. unwanted
knowledge leakage), and greater cultural distance increases the likely preference for a marketing or supplier alliance over an innovation-oriented alliance (Kaufmann and O’Neill 2007).
International alliances thus demand extensive protection against exchange hazards, which is
possible through effective partner selection. A frm should select a partner by making trust
and commitment the foremost priorities because alliance partners must believe that they can
depend on each other before they can possibly deal with the adverse consequences of cultural
differences (Cullen et al. 1995).

Alliance manager selection
National cultural differences may inhibit alliance managers’ ability to interact.To resolve this
issue, a frm preferably should select alliance staff with open minds and fexible personalities,
as well as those who demonstrate positive approaches during previous experiences in alliances
or international business settings. Schneider and Barsoux (1997) propose a set of behavioural
competences needed for effective intercultural performance, including linguistic ability, interpersonal (relationship) skills, cultural curiosity, ability to tolerate uncertainty and ambiguity,
fexibility and patience, cultural empathy, a strong sense of self and a sense of humour. If
managers lack these abilities, they need cultural training and education to help them adjust
to the different national cultures.The content of such training should be up to date and realistic, with an added focus on language profciency—insuffcient comprehension of another
198
International alliances
language often creates conficts.Trainers should preferably include native speakers of the language who maintain regular contact with their country of origin.These anticipatory trainings
are both costly and time-consuming, so some frms designate alliance staff with hands-on
cultural experience to conduct it. In another approach, an alliance partner sets up a team of
experienced managers who take responsibility for the alliance execution in an attempt to
absorb initial cultural shocks. As soon as the alliance operation is functioning smoothly, they
hand it over to others who continue their work.
Finally, when evaluating employees for staffng decisions, competency models provide useful guidance that can increase the organization’s ability to staff its alliances with employees
who will easily adjust to and enjoy cultural diversity.

The work climate
International alliance failure often results from the execution of the venture, rather than
the rationale and resources used to form it. The parties involved might fail to develop or
implement post-formation processes to overcome international barriers to success. Furthermore, a healthy working climate is critical to successful international alliances, which means
partners must be able to acknowledge their differences to avoid fatal conficts. For example,
Japanese frms and foreign partners may follow similar paths to develop trust, commitment,
credibility, reciprocity and benevolence, but trust tends to be more important for the former
(Cullen et al. 1995). In this sense, cultural differences between partners tend to inhibit open
and prompt communication, which is necessary to spur a process in which parties are able
to examine one another’s credibility and trustworthiness. Although partners with similar
cultural backgrounds also tend to use similar trust forms (e.g. cognitive versus affective),
they are more opportunistic when they embrace dissimilar trust forms. If cultural differences
are great, partners should invest in building a high-quality working climate to prevent the
emergence of inter-partner conficts and tensions. Similarly, norms that govern giving and
receiving feedback differ greatly across cultures, but regardless of culture, some feedback is
necessary to achieve effective relationships. Cultural differences leave feedback communications particularly prone to misunderstandings and misinterpretations, so well-designed
performance management practices should be in place to ensure that employees receive
the feedback they need in a culturally appropriate way. Investing in intensive cross-cultural
programmes can reduce the adverse impact of cultural differences overall, as well as improve
relational norms and capital, which positively infuence alliance performance (Brouthers and
Bamossy 2006).

International alliances: decision-making steps
Whereas international alliances enable companies to share risks and investments, as well as
obtain access to new technologies and markets, the international environments in which
they operate also exacerbate the likelihood of dissatisfying economic performance, distrust
between parties and premature termination.Therefore, the improper management of cultural
adversities contributes to high failure rates; decision making is critical in such situations to
avoid premature termination. To help steer international alliances towards greater chances
for success, we next present managerial guidelines for each stage of the alliance development
framework (see Figure 13.1).

International alliances
199
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Extend decision criteria to include national cultural contexts,
including resource motives, investments risks and local restrictions.
An alliance is preferred when strategic flexibility is required in
response to high market potential and high investment risks.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend partner selection criteria with national cultural indicators to
understand potential cultural adversities and opportunities.
Assess the extent to which a potential partner possesses international
experience and/or is willing to invest in cross-cultural management.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Adopt a negotiation approach consistent with the national culture of
negotiation partner.
Build a negotiation team with international experience.

4
Alliance
design
The preferred governance form is equity-based due to high risks; nonequity could be appropriate when relative low risks, enforced by
country regulations, and it fits with national cultural preference.
Excessive control undermines progress; contracts and management
control should fit with partners’ national cultural orientation.

5
Alliance
launch
Create many face-to-face meetings to learn about one another’s cultural
practices and overcome cultural misunderstandings and adversities.
Select delegates with cultural experience and sensitivity; have them
working together in small projects with attainable goals.

6
Alliance
management
7
Alliance
evaluation
8
Alliance
termination
FIGURE 13.1
Invest in relational governance to deal with potential national cultural
conflicts and to exploit cultural differences.
Interventions should fit with partners’ national culture; intervention
preferences vary across national cultural contexts.

Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing the
cultural impact areas, including communication, decision making,
trust, interpartner learning and conflict resolution.
Assess the foreign country’s regulations regarding (premature)
alliance termination; immediately explore alternatives if a presence in
the foreign country is of strategic importance.
Communicate exit to stakeholders: effective and efficient
communication accounts for different practices across
national cultural contexts.

Alliance development framework: international alliances
Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During its strategic analysis, a frm decides whether an international alliance is even an appropriate governance mode, compared with international mergers and acquisitions or other
forms, to realize its objectives (see Box 13.2). Before selecting a governance mode, the frm
should analyze whether it possesses suffcient know-how and know-what (i.e. cultural competence) to engage in an international endeavour. Detailed preparations in the form of crosscultural management efforts are required in order to guarantee that the international alliance
200
International alliances
BOX 13.2 MARKET ENTRY GOVERNANCE MODES
During the formulation of an alliance strategy, a frm decides which governance
mode—make, buy or ally—is appropriate for realizing its objectives. Though traditional
theoretical perspectives, such as transaction cost economics (TCE) and resource-based
view (RBV), ofer explanations (see Chapter 2), within the context of international
alliances, extant studies have investigated the impact of cultural distance on entry mode
choice, focussing on specifc governance modes, including wholly owned subsidiaries,
joint ventures, export alliances and acquisitions. Though contingencies (i.e. industry
and frm-level) may afect governance mode choice, some empirical support has highlighted a preference of wholly owned subsidiaries (i.e. full ownership) over joint ventures (i.e. shared ownership) when cultural distance increases. Focusing on the choice
between equity and non-equity alliance arrangements, research shows that managers’
preferences for an alliance governance is biased by cultural orientation. Managers from
countries with high uncertainty avoidance scores, for example, tend to prefer equitybased governance and complete alliance contracts, unlike managers from countries with
low scores, who tend to prefer non-equity alliances. The choice between minorityequity investment and joint ventures also varies with alliance managers’ diferent
perceptions of time. For example, Japanese partners tend to adopt longer time horizons
when dealing with exchange hazards, in contrast to their European and US counterparts, who adopt shorter time horizons. International alliances may also pose additional
risks, such as country-specifc regulations, opportunistic behaviour, knowledge leakage
and misappropriation, which necessitate the choice of a governance form which provides additional protection. Consequently, equity arrangements (i.e. international joint
ventures) supplemented with extensive contractual clauses and management control are
often used in cross-cultural alliances requiring superior safeguards, such as when there
is a large cultural distance between the partners.
Sources: Ang et al. (2015); Nippa and Reuer (2019).

delivers on its promise. In addition to various general considerations, frms must recognize
that forging an international alliance necessitates some additional, specifc analyses:
•
•
Partners of different countries often have different resource needs and offer different
resources and capabilities. For example, conditional on its resource alignment, an international alliance may have a low (high) degree of resource similarity and a high (low)
level of resource heterogeneity, which would suggest the appropriateness of (non) equitybased governance modes.
Distinct countries pose different risks and challenges due to their unique appropriation regimes, regulations and industry conditions. Collaboration then may constitute an
investment risk and induce additional transaction costs, which must be carefully analyzed.
For example, wholly owned subsidiaries are preferable to joint ventures when market
potential is high, investment risks are low and local legal restrictions are comparable for
both partners.

International alliances
201
Step 2: alliance partner selection
Differences in national culture between alliance partners could be an opportunity for or a threat
to joint value creation.The partner ft framework needs suffcient indicators to be able to identify ft (or misft) between national cultures. Against the background of a generic framework,
frms also need to acquire information about the national culture of their potential partners and
assess the possibility of adverse implications, as well as of potential synergies. A cultural misft
suggests that partner frms’ cultures are potentially incompatible, which could be detrimental to
alliance success. Being aware of possible cultural misfts is critical as they tend to relate to differences in communication and language, decision-making styles and problem-solving approaches.
The greater the cultural distance, the more measures are necessary to deal with cultural barriers,
which may adjust cost–beneft calculations downward. Furthermore, it is important to know
upfront whether a potential partner has suffcient experience and know-how to participate in an
international alliance: has the partner been involved in prior (successful) international alliances,
does it offer cultural training programmes and is it willing to appoint experienced managers?

Step 3: alliance negotiation
During the alliance negotiation stage, the frm needs to consider not only its negotiation
approach but also cultural dynamics.The national culture of the partners may determine the
right composition of the negotiation team, which topics are to be discussed and with whom,
and how to codify the results of the negotiation. Negotiators may want to adapt their strategy
and tactics to the cultural context of the alliance negotiation. For example, negotiators from
collectivist countries (e.g. Japan) are likely to respond adversely to hard negotiation tactics
because direct conficts cause them to become embarrassed, whereas their counterparts from
individualistic countries (e.g. United States) are better able to deal with open confrontation.

Step 4: alliance design
International alliances may also pose additional risks, such as country-specifc regulations,
opportunistic behaviour, knowledge leakage and misappropriation, which necessitate additional protection. Consequently, equity arrangements (i.e. international joint ventures) supplemented with extensive contractual clauses and management control can offer a preferred
governance form by functioning as a superior safeguard. However, not all international alliances include learning objectives, so sometimes excessive protections are unnecessary. Furthermore, excessive, prolonged control by a single partner tends to result in poor performance
because the costs associated with alliance design outweigh the benefts. Dominant control
also reduces incentives for active participation by the counterpart in the alliance. Efforts to
impose controls on a foreign partner might provoke resistance and hostility, thus undermining the development of the relational norms and capital that are so critical to success and the
resolution of cultural tensions.Thus, during the alliance design stage, partners need to resolve
a dilemma: how to include enough governance to secure individual interests without undermining the working relationship. Although clear-cut prescriptions are virtually impossible,
some guidelines can inform the related decision making:
•
Extend generic rationales for alliance design with contextual factors, such as countryspecifc regulations and investment risks. Some countries have strict laws and regulations
202
•
•
International alliances
that dictate acceptable alliance designs (e.g. China). Economic and social uncertainty
within a country will also infuence alliance design decisions.
Alliance design preferences are likely biased by cultural orientation. Managers from
countries with high uncertainty avoidance scores will focus on equity-based governance
and complete alliance contracts (to reduce uncertainty), unlike managers from countries
with low scores.
Even if dominant control appears appealing (e.g. a majority joint venture), alternative
design arrangements should be considered, such as non-equity-based alliances with supplemental contractual provisions and management control.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking an international alliance view, general alliance launch guidelines need to be tailored to attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. First, the alliance launch team should
pay attention to the specifc cultural backgrounds of the partners. Initial cultural conficts may
escalate quickly and become an integral part of alliance development (e.g. via story telling).To
deal with cultural differences, launch managers should assess and use cultural experiences that
have been built prior to the partners entering the relationship. In addition, social meetings,
training and joint experiences need to be organized to make staff aware of cultural differences
and how to deal with them. As part of the alliance launch strategy, extensive communication
becomes very important. The launch manager should inform employees at all levels about
the motives for and importance of the alliance relationship.As part of operational plans, communication should focus on overcoming cultural adversities and transforming differences in
synergetic opportunities (i.e. creative solutions).To overcome the ‘we-versus-us’ schism, kickoff meetings are critical at and across hierarchical levels. To accomplish these two tasks, it is
critical that alliance launch managers act as cross-cultural competent managers skilled to deal
with a variety of cultural backgrounds.

Step 6: alliance management
An important task during the alliance management stage is to harmonize actively the national
cultural differences between the partners, to the extent desired. Appropriate alliance designs
and launch management initiatives should have reduced the adverse impacts of cultural distance, but these differences remain manifest in the ongoing behaviour and thinking of the
people involved. Culturally specifc behaviours thus can produce misunderstanding, conficts, limited trust and learning barriers. For example, the developmental path of the international alliance depends on whether collectivist partners try to manage process discrepancies,
and then the resulting response of individualist partners to these interventions as they focus
instead on outcome discrepancies. In principle, the interaction could lead to the resolution of
the crisis or intensify it further.To avoid such cultural-based adversities, alliance management
should focus on the following:
•
•
Building collaborative communication patterns and, if necessary, undertaking management interventions to improve cultural awareness through training and education.
Interpreting constructive and destructive conficts consistently with cultural orientations
and using resolution techniques that ft the cultural context.

International alliances
•
•
203
Avoiding breakdowns in relational norms and capital (e.g. trust) and investing time,
energy and resources to rebuild them because strong working relationships are critical.
Understanding that responses to adverse situations vary across countries and thus considering partners’ cultural orientations while making response strategy decisions to prevent
destructive spirals of partner interactions.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
In international alliances, specifc consideration should be granted to performance metrics that
imply cross-cultural problems, such as communication, confict, trust, decision making and
learning.With such attention, the frm can monitor the process of working together and outcomes, which are pivotal for steering the international alliance. If alliance partners also intend
to combine the strengths of their national cultures, they need measures that facilitate cultural
integration.Also important is a consistent focus on shared goals and objectives. Certain training
programmes can inform employees about the shared goals of alliance partners, but performance
management systems must convince employees that the rhetoric fts the reality. Ideally, in each
development stage, all involved employees will understand how their performance is being
assessed and how those performance assessments relate to the overall goals for the alliance.

Step 8: alliance termination
Finally, and conditional on the alliance design (i.e. governance form and exit provisions) and
cultural orientation of the partners, frms must decide how to terminate their international
alliance to ensure favourable outcomes for all involved. Issues that the partners may need to
consider include the following.
•
•
•
Irrespective of whether the termination is intended or unintended, country-specifc regulations may affect the termination trajectory. For example, legal restrictions may inhibit
the acquisition or divestment of equity stakes.
If it is of strategic importance for one partner to be present in the foreign country, it
should explore alliance alternatives immediately and ensure that it capitalizes on its learning experiences.
Cultural orientations tend to infuence the effectiveness of communication strategies. For
example, in collectivistic countries, saving face is critical; an abrupt, premature alliance
termination will thus have serious repercussions for all parties.

Summary
International alliances confront managers with a unique challenge: the international environments in which they operate can either exacerbate adverse situations or create a new
opportunity.This challenge can be addressed using time-consuming processes associated with
becoming acquainted with others’ cultural dispositions.To reconcile cultural differences effectively, each partner must make an effort to learn the ideologies and values of its counterpart.
Developing mutual understanding prompts tolerance and a proactive approach to the reconciliation. In particular, it requires a systematic assessment of the characteristics of potential
international partners, a programme to deal with these cultural differences and attention to
key alliance design and management dimensions, depending on the partner’s nationality.

204
International alliances
CASE: DAMEN SHIPYARDS1
Damen Shipyards was established in 1927. In 1969, Mr Kommer Damen took over the
company from his father and introduced a revolutionary concept of modular construction to build small boats and launches. This concept of standardization (known today as
the Damen Standard) generated clear advantages: fast delivery times, reduced costs and
proven designs. Today, with more than 9,000 employees, the Damen Shipyards Group has
earned a leading position in the shipbuilding world. However, the concept of standardization and industrialization remains very much at the heart of the company. Partnerships
have always formed a strategic cornerstone of Damen Shipyards. The company actively collaborates with its clients, research institutes and suppliers to continuously innovate its ship
designs and associated products and service offerings and pursue state-of-the-art manufacturing capabilities. Being a family-owned company, partners tend to be engaged with high
intensity and a long-term focus. This is especially true for shipyards, with which Damen
Shipyards has many partnerships. Damen Shipyards actively partners with shipyards in
order to gain access to well-equipped production capacity with competitive capabilities.
Next, shipyards can provide access to local markets because local governments often regard
shipbuilding as having strategic importance to local and regional economies, especially in
developing countries.
An important region for Damen Shipyards is South East Asia. Due to political reforms in
South East Asia, the business landscape has changed considerably since the 1980s. Damen
Shipyards was early to venture into China. In 1994, Damen Shipyards established a joint venture with Changde Shipyards, which was followed by the acquisition by Damen Shipyards
in 2002. In Vietnam, political changes allowed for new business activity. From 1986 on, the
Vietnamese government initiated the Doi Moi policies. These policies changed the country
from a traditional communist, centrally led state economy to a ‘socialist-oriented market
economy’. This was followed by reforms in legal frameworks in the private sector. In 1990,
the Law on Private Enterprises, which provided a legal basis to private frms, was enacted,
while the Companies Law acknowledged joint-stock companies and private limited liability
companies. The constitution established in 1992 offcially recognized the role of the private
sector. By 1994, the Netherlands had established an Embassy in Vietnam, and this embassy
has played an important role in stimulating trade between the Netherlands and Vietnam.
One of the frst companies to become active in Vietnam was Damen Shipyards. Along with
an attractive domestic and regional market, the highly motivated and well-trained Vietnamese labour force provided the strategic foundation for Damen Shipyards to start venturing
in Vietnam.
Before venturing into Asia, Damen Shipyards was selling ships that were most often
being built in the Netherlands. This proved to be a diffcult commercial concept. Ships were
too expensive, and Asian customers disliked the fact that their ships were being constructed
on the other side of the world. In 2002, Damen Shipyards won a Vietnamese tender for
six search and rescue (SAR) vessels. The Vietnamese requested that these ships be built in
Vietnam in order to support the local economy. Damen Shipyards was willing to do this
and decided that fve of the six vessels would be built in Vietnam. To select the appropriate shipyard in Vietnam, a tender was released for the construction of these fve vessels.
Numerous yards were visited by Damen Shipyards staff. The general impression was that
most yards did not meet the high standards that Damen Shipyards required. However, next
International alliances
205
to the focus on the yards’ ‘hardware’ and current capabilities, Damen Shipyards looked
closely at the human resources and management mindset. If these yards were to build ships
according to the Damen Shipyards standard, both yard management and personnel had
to be eager to learn and engage in an active collaboration for the construction of the SAR
ships. The management team of Song Cam Shipyard in Haiphong had the eagerness Damen
Shipyards was looking for. The management team of Song Cam Shipyard realized that collaboration with Damen Shipyards would enable them to learn state-of-the-art shipbuilding
practices and increase competitiveness. The two parties collaborated to build the fve SAR
vessels. The cooperation left Damen Shipyards very satisfed with the building quality and
costs. Song Cam Shipyards had received technical and management support, enabling it to
further improve its shipbuilding standards. Both parties were very satisfed with the quality
of the cooperation.
During that same period, Australia had a high demand for powerful but simple tug boats
that could be operated by a two-man crew. The development and construction of these vessels progressed slowly partly due to the fact that these ships were being built in a crowded
yard in the Netherlands. This led to an experiment in which Damen Shipyards allowed Song
Cam Shipyard to construct two of these ships. The construction of these ships commenced
in a very smooth manner. Costs were far lower than expected, while similar quality was
delivered as in the Netherlands. This led to a following assignment involving the construction of four vessels. This represented the start of a more durable alliance between Song Cam
Shipyard in Vietnam and Damen Shipyards in the Netherlands.
Damen Shipyards began to regard Song Cam Shipyard as one of the primary production locations for Damen Shipyards in South East Asia. Damen increased the amount
of ships that were to be built at Song Cam Shipyards. Since a high level of trust existed
between the two parties, the level of formality was initially kept low. A minimum quantity
of production value was never agreed. Prices were not agreed up front; the only obligation
that Song Cam had was to offer sharp prices, while remaining proftable. This required
Damen Shipyards to actively monitor the sharing of profts between Damen Shipyards and
Song Cam Shipyards. The amount of ships subcontracted to Song Cam Shipyard grew
quickly due to the attractive cost price and good quality. This led to further formalization
of the relationship between Damen Shipyards and Song Cam Shipyards to counterbalance
potential business risks.
The formal agreements not only entailed the initial requirement on profitability
but also required Song Cam Shipyard to grant exclusivity to Damen Shipyards. Song
Cam Shipyards also had to abandon its sales activities. In exchange, Damen Shipyards
would share technical and management knowledge, increasing the yard’s competitiveness. Damen Shipyards would also ensure a reasonable utilization of the yard. Damen
Shipyards would be responsible for sales, product development, engineering and
after-sales, while Song Cam Shipyards would be responsible for the construction of
the vessels.
The cultural distance between the Netherlands-based Damen Shipyards and Vietnambased Song Cam Shipyards was signifcant. The Netherlands is characterized by a low power
distance and high levels of individualism, while Vietnam has a high power distance and is a
highly collectivist culture. High cultural awareness of Damen Shipyards staff was important
for a successful outcome. Damen Shipyards employees knew the Vietnamese culture due to
their pioneering activities in the years before the partnership was established.

206
International alliances
Damen Shipyards uses a simple but effective model in which the various stages are
described in building a business relationship. The model describes the following four phases:
(1) getting acquainted, (2) earning respect, (3) building trust and (4) granting business. In
Vietnam, moving from one phase to the next requires time and collective decision making. Damen Shipyards was willing to invest time and refrained from a ‘hit-and-run’ mentality. From 1994 on, Damen Shipyards was already pioneering the Vietnamese shipbuilding
market. Damen Shipyards representatives visited Vietnam frequently. This illustrated the
endurance and willingness of Damen Shipyards to build sincere business relations with Vietnamese companies, which helped move from making acquaintance to building respect. The
building of trust requires a company to stay true to its word, even when it makes no sense
from a business model point of view.
At one point, a project in Vietnam failed, causing considerable risk for loss of face for
Vietnamese management and offcials involved. Damen Shipyards assigned its resources
to turning the project around and making it into a success. This had a lasting positive
effect on the impression the Vietnamese had of Damen Shipyards. This event was an
important contributor to building the required trust. An important element in the collectivist culture is that decision making takes place in groups and committees. This meant
that numerous people knew Damen Shipyards and were able to translate the positive
reputation in their respective communities. Therefore, the positive behaviour of Damen
Shipyards became quickly known by a larger group of people. Within the Vietnamese
shipbuilding community and associated political levels within Vietnam, Damen Shipyards
became known as a trustworthy party. Avoiding shame is also important in Vietnam. As
Damen Shipyards takes responsibility for handling complex projects, these projects are
turned into a success. These aspects, combined with ORET (the Dutch Development Aid
Fund), meant that Damen Shipyards was fnally offered a business opportunity through
the tender of six SAR vessels. This initiated the relationship between Damen Shipyards and
Song Cam Shipyard.
Since 2002, the relationship between Damen Shipyards and Song Cam Shipyards has
been very successful. Damen Shipyards has also set up similar collaborations with other
shipyards; in the meantime, more than 250 ships have been produced at these locations.
However, bridging the cultural distance remains challenging. To ensure the durability
of this relationship, a management structure has been designed in which both representatives of Damen Shipyards and Song Cam Shipyards are positioned. Next, due to
the increased strategic nature of the alliance, Damen Shipyards and Song Cam Shipyards
have decided to move on to an equity-based relationship by setting up a joint venture
called Damen Song Cam Shipyards. A result of this joint venture is the construction of
a modern, state-of-the-art shipyard in the city of Haiphong. Although Damen Shipyards
has a majority stake in the joint venture, the partners treat each other as equals, which is
also represented in the governance structures. Both Damen Shipyards, as a family-owned
business, and Song Cam Shipyards, as part of the collectivist Vietnamese culture, regard
each other as being part of the same family. This level of trust and sincerity provides
the foundation of the alliance and allows both parties to effectively bridge their cultural
differences.

International alliances
207
Questions
1
2
Explain how cross-cultural diferences between Dutch-based Damen Shipyard and
Vietnamese-based Song Cam Shipyards without careful cross-cultural management
may have led to adversities between the partners.
Explain how cross-cultural diferences may have afected the decision to opt for a joint
venture and what post-formation initiatives may have been developed to steer the joint
venture towards success.

Note
1 Interview with a senior executive of Damen Shipyard.

14
ASYMMETRICAL ALLIANCES
Alliances tend to be asymmetrical in nature, such that a dominant partner has a bargaining
power advantage due to its superior resource endowments.1 When such power asymmetries
characterize the relationship, alliance partners are engaged in an asymmetrical alliance; the
dominant frm can exert power, and the weaker frm risks being taken advantage of. In turn,
dominant frms might appropriate the lion’s share of the alliance benefts.Without proper
management, power asymmetries create an eminent risk of inequitable value appropriation and sub-optimal alliance performance.Thus partners—especially weaker ones—face a
unique challenge: fnding the balance between exploiting resource asymmetries to create
value while still preventing the escalation that can result from power asymmetries. This
chapter focuses on this asymmetrical alliance challenge (frst section) and elaborates on
the mechanisms that managers might use to deal with it (second section). Connecting
asymmetrical alliances with the alliance development framework offers some guidelines
for decision making (third section). We conclude the chapter with a summary and a case
illustration.

The asymmetrical alliance challenge
Alliances are forged from resource interdependencies between frms, which provide them
with an opportunity to create value jointly. However, interdependency between frms is rarely
equal, so an asymmetrical alliance results (see Table 14.1), in which one (dominant) partner
possesses a net bargaining power advantage, and the other (weaker) partner possesses a net bargaining power disadvantage. By combining the partners’ unique resources, the alliance might
enable signifcant advantages. However, a dominant frm with a bargaining power advantage
could exercise or even just threaten to use its power to coerce the weaker frm to comply with
its demands, which reduces the weaker frm’s motivation to continue the alliance (Gulati and
Sytch 2007) and probably diminishes alliance performance. Even though asymmetry often
offers advantages for both partners (e.g. resource asymmetry; see Chapter 3), the presence of
power asymmetries (one specifc form of asymmetry) tends to infuence partners’ commitment to value-creating activities.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-14
Asymmetrical alliances
209
TABLE 14.1 Examples of asymmetrical alliances
Description
Amazon–ATDC
In 2022,Amazon Robotics invested in the Georgia Institute of
Technology’s Advanced Technology Development Center (ATDC).
ATDC is a startup incubator that helps technology entrepreneurs
in Georgia build, launch and scale successful companies.The
goal of the investment is to accelerate growth of automation and
robotics by leveraging staff and resources at ATDC in collaboration
with Amazon.They also work with Amazon to identify specifc
areas of technical interest with the aim of developing virtual and
physical events to attract relevant startups.

Garmin–iSpot TV
Garmin and iSpot TV have an active Technology Partnership.
iSpot TV is a medium-sized organization which helps advertisers
measure the brand and business impact of TV and streaming
advertising, from concept to airing to conversion. Garmin is
multinational and wants to be a sustainable company that makes
superior products that can be used in cars, planes, boats, nature and
sports, and play an important role in the lives of their customers.

MasterCard: StartPath™
MasterCard initiated StartPath™ to demonstrate its commitment
to innovation through partnerships with early stage startups.
MasterCard partners with startups from around the world to help
scale their businesses, to develop new products and solutions and
to accelerate the future of eCommerce.The programme enables
startups to gain access to MasterCard’s global ecosystem and to
break new markets through relationships with MasterCard and its
customers. Some key features include a six-month virtual program,
two immersion weeks at different cities and no upfront equity in
exchange for participation.

Coca Cola–Kol and TeleRetail
In 2019, Coca-Cola European Partners (CCEP) invested in
two startups (Kol and TeleRetail) to explore how on-demand
delivery and self-driving technologies can transform the customer
experience.
Coca Cola would share their experience with Kol and TeleRetail
and learn from each business’s innovation.Through these
partnerships, they can ensure that they are continually adapting
their own established model for a digital-frst world and have an
innovative new approach to getting their drinks into the hands of
their customers faster.

JP Morgan Chase & Co.:
In-Residence
In 2016, JPMorgan Chase & Co. started a new programme,
In-Residence.The objective was to foster fntech startup
companies in-house as they try to fnd ways to operate faster,
with more security at a lower cost.The programme offers
fntech startups access to facilities, systems and expertise to
enhance their ability to create technology-led solutions that
can be put into practical use for the industry. Fintechs with
potential may receive continued support after the offcial six
month period ends.

Sources: Amazon (2022a); Coca-Cola (2019); iSpotTV (2022); Mittelman (2016); StartPath (2016); Garmin (2021).

210 Asymmetrical alliances
We warn, however, against the common misconception that power asymmetries always
refect frm size (see Box 14.1). Small frms often have strong motives to forge an alliance with larger frms (Street and Cameron 2007), but they are not necessarily the weaker
partner. Certainly larger frms tend to have more resources, can draw on more extensive
partnership experience and possess more (fnancial) stamina to endure negative alliance outcomes or conficts. Furthermore, alliances with larger frms tend to increase the legitimacy
of smaller frms and offer them an opportunity to tap into a broader resource base, which
implies a faster time to market, better ability to serve new and geographically dispersed
markets and market expansion (Alvarez and Barney 2001). These trends often lead to the
presumption that larger frms are always more powerful than smaller frms. But smaller frms
can possess specifc resources (e.g. need for radical innovations) with great value to a larger
frm, and their organizational characteristics (e.g. an innovation and entrepreneurial focus)
may appeal greatly to that larger partner.Thus a smaller frm can dominate an alliance if it
provides crucial, unique resources that the larger frm must have. In forging asymmetrical
alliances, frms must therefore resist the temptation to attribute power solely on the basis of
the partner’s size.
A weaker frm forges an asymmetrical alliance because it hopes to gain access to valuable resources owned by the dominant frm. For example, manufacturers might enter into a
BOX 14.1 SMALL FIRMS AND ALLIANCES
In successfully realizing their objectives, small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs)
often have a resource dependency on other frms. SMEs can gain substantially from
forging alliance relationships. Resources that are shared allow SMEs to develop market propositions, gain scale advantages or penetrate new markets. Next, through these
collaborations, SMEs are also provided with learning opportunities, which are particularly useful when structuring a growing organization (see Table 14.1 for examples). Alliances are also pivotal to enable an SME to accelerate its (international)
growth and market performance. International growth is strongest when relationships
are forged with noncompeting partners. In contrast to the benefts, alliance research
also shows that alliances pose risks and challenges for SMEs. SMEs must be aware
of the fact that partnering with large-scale frms imposes power imbalances, which
might jeopardize the SME viability. In addition, other partner misfts are likely to
exist—often confused with symptoms of power asymmetry—and partners should
take adequate alliance design and management precautions to curb inevitable adversities (e.g. decision making and cultural conficts). Developing alliance management
capabilities is thus important to attain SME alliance success. Next, research has shown
that SMEs have to be careful not to embrace too many alliances. Establishing a moderate number of alliances provides SMEs with the resources (e.g. capital, reputation
and technology) required to grow. Establishing too many will cause a dilution in
management attention.
Sources: Franco and Haase (2015); Moghaddam et al. (2016); Mohr et al. (2014).

Asymmetrical alliances
211
partnership with more powerful integrators, distributors and retailers to market their products. For the dominant frm, access to the specifc resources possessed by the weaker frm also
constitutes a primary motivator for establishing the alliance. Pharmaceutical frms with large
and established R&D centres, for example, could ally with smaller biotechnological frms that
have less bargaining power but offer state-of-the-art, commercially unexploited knowledge.
The weaker biotechnology frms in turn receive fnancing for their high-risk research programmes, and the dominant frms can continue to expand their competitive advantage. If this
setting entails a low risk of misappropriation, the asymmetrical alliance represents a viable
strategy for both partners.
But regardless of these strong motives for asymmetrical alliance formation, a power asymmetry inherently represents a source of alliance friction that poses a particularly stringent risk
on the weaker party.That is, because the dominant partner can appropriate an unequal share
of the value created by the alliance, it enjoys a better position relative to, and at the expense of,
its weaker counterpart.Vandaie and Zaheer (2014) provide indirect support for this claim as
they show that small movie studios that engage in higher levels of alliance activity with large
(dominant) partners, i.e. the major studios, realize lower growth benefts from their internal
capability. Although dominant frms may not use this power advantage to exploit their partners, weaker frms remain subject to the threat of exploitation. The very threat is likely to
increase conficts and reduce relationship proclivity. Moreover, the presence of this threat may
cause the weaker frm to react preemptively to defend itself, which creates the further risk of
retaliation by its dominant counterpart, perhaps in the form of the threatened misappropriation.Thus even when both partners are fully aware of the value generated by an alliance, the
asymmetrical dynamic gives rise to frustration and tension, undermines joint value creation
and can harm both the weaker and the dominant frm.
Whereas asymmetrical alliances may offer signifcant advantages for both partners, the
realization of benefts requires cooperative behaviour. Power asymmetry creates the risk of
misappropriation by the dominant frm, which will evoke dysfunctional conficts and translates into alliance under-performance.To deal with this challenge, managers involved in asymmetrical alliances, especially those who represent the weaker party, must learn how to defend
against or neutralize the adverse impacts of power asymmetry to ensure that their initiatives
do not interfere with the collaborative efforts and benefts of the alliance.

Managing asymmetrical alliances
Bargaining power implies an ability to change multi-party agreements in one’s own favour,
such that individual benefts are maximized. By using their bargaining power, frms infuence
both the scope of activities within the alliance and the appropriation of the resulting alliance
benefts (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978). Dominant frms enjoy an advantageous position; with
their bargaining power, they can deploy various strategies, from non-coercive to coercive,
and reap the benefts. The weaker frm suffers a great risk because of its lack of bargaining
power, which minimizes its ability to prevent exploitation.A weaker frm must take a reactive
position to secure its share of the value generated, and these strategies are relatively limited.
Because a fair distribution of value (i.e. outcomes relative to contributions) between partner
frms is crucial to build stable alliances, we propose three sets of tactics that weaker frms
might use to deal with dominant partners: (1) offensive, (2) defensive and (3) acceptance
(see Table 14.2).

212
Asymmetrical alliances
TABLE 14.2 Managing asymmetrical alliances
(1) Offensive tactics
(2) Defensive tactics
(3) Acceptance tactics
Logic
Seeking to (re)balance
power relationship between
partners; mutual dependence
offers incentives to preserve
alliance.

Installing protection
against misappropriation;
being protected offers
parties incentives to
preserve alliance.

Accepting power asymmetry
and using non-power-based
tactics; equitable outcome
offers incentives to preserve
alliance.

Goal
Change in resource–need
balance.

Change in alliance
governance.

Accepting power asymmetry.

Mechanisms Provide additional and/
(examples)
or intangible resources;
make relationship-specifc
investments, inter-frm
learning.

Equity arrangement,
contractual provisions,
residual sharing, task
specialization, relational
capital.

Trade off relative share for
absolute outcome, trade off
objectives, exploit spillover
and information asymmetry.

Downside
Exposure to exploitation by
May require extensive
dominant frm as alliance
resources, diffcult to
impose contractual clauses progresses.
on dominant partner.

May trigger retaliation by
dominant frm, undermines
weaker frm’s position.

Ofensive tactics
Weaker frms may take a proactive stance to reduce the threat of misappropriation (Wang et al.
2016). In this case, their offensive tactics aim to shift the resource–need asymmetry to enhance
their own relative bargaining power position (Makhija and Ganesh 1997). For example, they
might proactively contribute more valuable resources to the alliance, which would increase
the dependence of the dominant frm on them (Blodgett 1991b). Contributing additional or
intangible resources should also enhance their bargaining position. It is unlikely that intangible resources, which are more diffcult to transfer, can be seized by a dominant, more powerful frm, so the provider of these resources can protect itself from this form of opportunism
(Coff 1999). Proactively redefning market boundaries may enable weaker frms to opt for
substitute partners, which reduces their dependence on new partners and therefore offers
strategic options in terms of negotiating with a dominant counterpart (Chiambaretto 2015).
Weaker frms can also increase the dependence of their dominant counterparts (i.e. reduce
the dominant frm’s power) by convincing them to make specialized, relationship-specifc
investments to signal their commitment to the relationship (Gulati et al. 1994). If a frm is tied
to the alliance through specialized investments, it cannot easily dissolve that alliance without
incurring signifcant costs and the loss of non-recoverable investments (Klein et al. 1978). In
addition, (supplier) customization and bonding through managerial ties tend to mitigate the
detrimental effect of (buyer) power advantage on long-term collaboration (Wang et al. 2016).
Finally, learning can help a weaker frm improve its bargaining power (Hamel 1991) because
acquiring knowledge from a dominant partner expands its resource base and thus reduces its
dependency over time.
Yet offensive tactics also can be counter-productive in that they ultimately decrease the
weaker frm’s relative power, leading eventually to a greater risk of exploitation by a dominant partner. In particular, offensive tactics can trigger retaliation because the dominant frm
Asymmetrical alliances
213
is motivated to retain its strong ability to appropriate value. Furthermore, by increasing their
resource contributions, weaker frms might enter into even more vulnerable positions because
they are likely to commit substantial expenditures that are open to retaliatory actions by the
dominant frm. Such contributions also make the weaker frms more dependent because they
have increased their alliance-specifc stake. If weaker frms instead choose a learning race
(Hamel 1991), they undermine the relationship’s value-creation potential. Moreover, without
some partner-specifc absorptive capacity to acquire socially and organizationally embedded
skills, expertise or tacit knowledge, learning tactics also are not particularly effective. Even
when offensive tactics enhance a weaker frm’s bargaining power by reducing the power
asymmetry, their use ultimately may provide the dominant frm with more leverage to exploit
its overall bargaining power advantage.

Defensive tactics
Defensive tactics serve rather as mechanisms to protect the frm against value misappropriation (Oxley 1997). Such tactics build on the logic that frms with superior power seek to
exploit their power, so weaker partners must try to limit that exploitation by adopting a
defensive, protective stance. Forms of such protection include a governance structure that prohibits the use of bargaining power or rules that guarantee an appropriate division of alliance
benefts. Compared with non-equity arrangements, equity-based alliances (e.g. joint ventures) offer better protection against misappropriation (Gulati and Singh 1998) because they
guarantee the weaker partner a pre-specifed share of the value created, depending on their
equity stake. For example,Yang and colleagues (2014) show that weaker frms (i.e. small) are
more likely to appropriate value from an exploration-based alliance, if governed by an equitybased structure, whereas a non-equity arrangement suffces for exploitation-based objectives.
Contractual provisions such as royalties and transfer prices offer another form of protection
against misappropriation because they summarize frms’ ex-ante agreement about the expost distribution of value (Hagedoorn and Hesen 2007). Detailed contracts that specify, for
example, the use of patents, the nondisclosure of trade secrets, exclusivity conditions and task
specialization protect the frm from partner misappropriation, such as the unwanted transfer
of proprietary resources or knowledge (Katila et al. 2008). In addition, frms can invest in
trust- and commitment-building efforts because relational capital tends to reduce the risk of
exploitative behaviour (Kale et al. 2000).
Similarly, defensive tactics have their own limitations.Weaker frms may expose themselves
to exchange hazards by using contract-based defensive tactics in that they lack the power
to coerce a dominant frm to comply. In this case, the dominant frms are more likely to
obtain formal controls to reinforce their power imbalance (Yan and Gray 2001). Moreover,
weaker frms tend to prefer simpler contracts, which lack the clauses necessary to deal with
unforeseen misappropriation (Ariño and Reuer 2004). More complete contracts increase
contract monitoring burdens, and many weaker frms lack the resources and opportunities to
monitor contract fulflment actively. In contrast, incomplete contracts are less of a concern for
dominant frms, which can just substitute their bargaining power. Relational-based defensive
tactics also entail risks. A high-quality working relationship could substitute for an alliance
contract (Lui and Ngo 2004), but over-reliance on relational governance leaves the weaker
frm exposed to exploitation (Barney and Hansen 1994). Relationship building also is expensive and time-consuming: if it stretches its limited resources to focus on better relationships,
214
Asymmetrical alliances
the weaker frm could undermine its vulnerable position even further. In summary, defensive
tactics may seem appealing to weaker frms to protect themselves against misappropriation by
the dominant frm, but they also have serious potential repercussions.

Acceptance tactics
As the name suggests, acceptance tactics acknowledge upfront that dominant frms are better positioned to extract value. However, they also assume that weaker frms can contribute
best to establishing stable asymmetrical relationships if they accept this power difference,
rather than actively addressing the power differences as the offensive and defensive tactics do.
To avoid direct conficts, weaker frms simply accept the power asymmetry and use careful
tactics to appropriate value, which increases the likelihood of alliance stability. During alliance negotiations, partner frms bargain about the distribution of anticipated value, and the
allocation depends primarily on the partners’ relative bargaining power.The weaker frm may
purposefully accept a relative smaller share in this negotiation to stimulate joint value creation,
with the belief that doing so will eventually provide a larger absolute (not relative) share. In
addition, it may trade off some alliance objectives, such that its fnancial loss is compensated
by an opportunity to acquire knowledge. Finally, the weaker frm might increase its pay-off
by focusing on forms of value that are diffcult to specify ex ante in an alliance contract, such
as knowledge spillover. If it possesses information about future circumstances, the weaker frm
could strategically wait patiently to exploit its information asymmetry.
Of course, acceptance tactics also have their own limitations.Weaker frms expose themselves to future (unforeseen) exchange hazards because the effectiveness of these tactics partially depends on the success of the alliance. For example, reaping a large absolute share,
trading off between alliance objectives and exploiting information asymmetries all require
that the alliance create value frst.The weaker frm therefore needs to demonstrate its commitment before it can appropriate its share of value, although as the alliance progresses, the
dominant frm could exploit its advantage to secure its individual interests. Despite this disadvantage, acceptance tactics help the weaker frm increase its individual benefts, just not at the
expense of the dominant frm. It thus can avoid direct conficts, prompt cooperation, focus on
value creation and appropriate value without jeopardizing alliance stability.
The different properties tied to each type of tactic thus have varying implications. Offensive
and defensive tactics require some bargaining power to appropriate value, and their use can
clearly initiate conficts.Acceptance tactics suggest that bargaining power is just one of multiple
ways to appropriate value, and conficts can be avoided. Acceptance of power imbalances also
encourages cooperation without imposing a cost on the dominant frm, unlike tactics to manage power, which prompt competition. Although frms preferably select partners with which
they can achieve a net bargaining power balance, which would reduce the need for protection,
acceptance tactics make bargaining power a somewhat less important selection criteria. In turn,
the degree of contractual specifcation can be minimized, unlike offensive and defensive tactics,
which often require formalized alliance contracts (e.g. specifying resource contributions) if
they are to avoid and resolve ex-post conficts. Investing in relational norms and contributing
capital increases alliance stability, especially in the context of offensive and defensive tactics,
in that their effectiveness depends partially on the degree of trust and support offered by the
dominant partner. In contrast, acceptance tactics require less trust and commitment because
implementation can be unilateral and without partner support. In practice though, weaker
frms might use offensive, defensive and acceptance tactics simultaneously and interchangeably.

Asymmetrical alliances
215
Asymmetrical alliances: decision-making steps
Although asymmetrical alliances are common, they are also inherently unstable. In addition to generic guidelines, we identify several specifc managerial guidelines that will enable
alliance managers to turn potentially unstable asymmetrical alliances into stable ones. To
this end, we discuss asymmetrical alliances in light of our alliance development framework
(see Figure 14.1).

1
Alliance strategy
formulation
The degree of power asymmetry is unclear at this stage; generic
governance mode guidelines apply with a focus on alliance objectives,
required resources and resource dependence.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Assess sources of bargaining power, including context- and resourcebased power, firm size, alliance experience and partner’s history.
Assess relative bargaining power.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Determine negotiation bandwidth and select tactics to deal with
bargaining power disadvantage: offensive, defensive and acceptance.
A weaker firm may mask its weakness with a variety of negotiation
tactics, including persuasion, communication and charisma.

4
Alliance
design
Equity-based governance provides protection but may lead to
excessive governance costs for the weaker firm.
Specify contractual provisions and management control for resource
contributions, monitoring, compensation scheme, task specialization
and other types of contractual protection.

5
Alliance
launch
Explicate and discuss potential power differences, as awareness
reduces the likelihood of and prepares staff to deal with power games.
Pay specific attention to partner misfits, as they are inherently tied to
asymmetrical alliances and demand a prompt resolution.

6
Alliance
management
Invest in relational governance to substitute for contractual
governance; especially critical with offensive tactics.
Anticipate possible repercussions and align interventions; conflict
resolution and anticipation of responses is prerequisite to stability.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing changes
in the sources of bargaining power (e.g. context, resources, learning),
fulfillment of contractual obligations, quality of working relationship
and misappropriation.

8
Alliance
termination
Anticipate unintended termination; exit procedures should preferably
be part of the alliance negotiation and embodied in the alliance
contract, such as termination fees or exit notifications.

FIGURE 14.1
Alliance development framework: asymmetrical alliances
216
Asymmetrical alliances
Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the strategic analysis, frms decide whether an alliance is an appropriate governance
mode for realizing their objectives. At this point, frms do not have any understanding of
whether the potential alliance will be symmetric or not because their relative bargaining
power is a function solely of the potential partner’s bargaining power. Nevertheless, given
their objectives, frms identify the required resources and determine the nature and severity
of interdependencies with other frms to gain access to resources that cannot be provided
autonomously. Interdependency provides strong collaboration motives to capture synergies;
however, increasing dependence on a potential partner could also suggest the benefts of
internalizing an activity to secure the focal resources. If a frm is willing to accept some
power asymmetry, however, the alliance could be the preferred alternative because the costs of
internalization might outweigh the potential benefts. For weaker frms, these benefts probably involve access to deeper, broader resource bases and potentially advantageous reputation
effects. For dominant frms, the benefts primarily pertain to specifc resources that extend
and enhance their competitive advantage. By allying rather than internalizing, dominant frms
also minimize divestment, coordination and integration costs.

Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection phase, power asymmetries should be identifed and analyzed
prior to the actual selection. Specifc attention should centre on assessing the sources of
bargaining power and levels of power asymmetry. In addition to partners’ characteristics and
motives for establishing the alliance, each frm should consider the following topics:
•
•
•
•
Sources of partners’ bargaining power, including context-based (e.g. possessing more
scope to form an alliance than a potential partner) and resource-based (e.g. possessing
more valuable and scarce sources than a potential partner) power.
Other indicators of power, such as frm size (because the relative importance of alliances
tends to be greater for small frms), alliance experience (which improves frms’ ability
to exploit power) and cultural background (because national cultural orientations may
favour power use).
The relative bargaining power of each potential partner, which reveals whether the
intended alliance is asymmetrical. Such information is necessary to develop the most
effective negotiation approach.
The possibility of partnering beyond the narrow boundaries of an existing market/
industry. Forging global and cross-border alliances allows weaker frms to escape from
dominant industry incumbents.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
As the introduction to this chapter noted, asymmetrical alliances confront weaker partners
with a unique challenge: to negotiate a favourable outcome without any bargaining power to
make demands. Formulating a negotiation approach therefore requires substantial thought and
consideration about the various tactics available, including offensive, defensive and acceptance
tactics. Each tactic has unique and specifc implications for the negotiation span and alliance
stages. Offensive tactics demand additional resource contributions, which will increase the
Asymmetrical alliances
217
weaker frm’s stake in the alliance. Unilateral or mutual relationship-specifc investments both
increase the commitments of the partnering frms and function as exit barriers. However,
they also demand precise, careful negotiations and contractual specifcation to avoid ex-post
exploitation. Similarly, defensive tactics require ex-ante agreements about ex-post beneft
sharing, and their use often requires formal alliance contracts that might specify, for example,
equity exchanges, royalties and trade secret protections.Acceptance tactics require that negotiators consider trade-offs between short- and long-term interests (common and private),
thereby avoiding confict with a dominant partner.
In addition, a weaker frm may use negotiation tactics to mask its weaknesses. Through
communication and persuasion, a good negotiator might coerce its counterpart to accept
outcomes that confict with its own interests.A negotiator also might present information to
make the outcomes seem like a win–win situation—whether they are or not. A charismatic,
skilled negotiator who can build strong personal relationships may function as another infuence tactic, as can consistent advocacy of normative conformity (i.e. convincing claims that
a particular position is correct, legitimate or principled). However, excessive negotiation may
jeopardize relational norms and capital, which are necessary to protect weaker partners from
exploitation by their dominant counterparts.

Step 4: alliance design
Equity-based arrangements provide protection against exploitation; they also can create
excessive governance costs, depending on the partners’ actual objectives. Partner frms should
follow generic guidelines to select an appropriate governance form. Irrespective of the form
they adopt, though, the alliance design stage should emphasize the alliance contract and supplemental coordination mechanisms.The preferred tactic also infuences the protective measures that should be embodied in an alliance contract. Agreements about partners’ resource
contributions and mechanisms to monitor the fulflment of their obligations should nearly
always be specifed. Formalizing their task specialization can prevent leaks of vital knowledge
between partners by limiting access to strategically important competences and capabilities.
Each frm thus should defne which activities and processes are most vulnerable to unwanted
leakage and the degree to which its partner would be able to absorb that knowledge. Provisions specifying exclusivity and non-disclosure of trade secrets should also be incorporated in
any contract. By setting up incentive structures that continually reward cooperation (i.e. residual sharing), partners can develop the foundation for a stable asymmetrical alliance. Finally,
alliance design should allow for intensive inter-frm contact because strong working relationships reduce the tendency to resort to bargaining power. High-quality working relationships
are generally characterized by strong bonds between the individual representatives of partnering frms, which enhances mutual trust. Thus overall the alliance contract should formalize
ex-ante decisions that aim to reduce ex-post ambiguities related to the division of benefts
between partners and help mitigate ex-post repercussions of the use of bargaining power.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking an asymmetrical alliance view, generic alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be
aware of two points. First, although the partners contractually agreed on how to deal with asymmetry (i.e. curb the threat of exploitation), it is imperative they establish a collaborative climate
218
Asymmetrical alliances
from the start.To overcome the ‘we-versus-us’ schism, kick-off meetings are important at and
across hierarchical levels.The purpose is to induce collective sense-making processes that signal
that they are mutually dependent on one another to attain the collective alliance objectives. Second, based on the partner ft analysis, they should address partner misfts and align, for example,
differences in decision-making authority (e.g. organize mandates), differences in organizational
culture (e.g. organize social meetings) and differences in performance systems (e.g. develop a
new system).To accomplish these two tasks, it is critical alliance launch managers act as neutral
mediators between the partners, advocating both dominant and weaker frms’ interests.

Step 6: alliance management
The risk of exploitation represents a continuous threat. At any given point, a dominant frm
may to decide to exploit its bargaining power advantage. Therefore, according to their alliance monitoring and evaluation efforts, weaker frms should focus on building relational
norms and capital. Regardless of the governance structure or management control, partners’
ability to infuence each other in a relational sense is critical to effective interaction, learning,
knowledge transfer and joint decision making. Because relational infuence becomes manifest
as mutual support, forbearance and power sharing, it may be more effective than contractual
governance as a means to avoid misappropriation. Moreover, it facilitates confict resolution
and joint decision making. Other alliance processes, such as responses to adversity and interfrm learning, also demand attention. Partners may develop an interaction pattern in response
to adversity that stimulates power use, such as when dominant frms engage in opportunistic
behaviour or aggressively impose solutions onto their weaker counterparts, which prompts
the weaker frms to respond with similar tactics. In contrast, more constructive responses,
such as seeking compromises and creative solutions, imply power avoidance. When partners
organize and monitor learning processes, they also acknowledge knowledge transfer as an
important source of shifts in bargaining power and confict.Thus in addition to the generic
alliance management guidelines, weaker frms should focus on confict avoidance so as to
develop stable relationships, particularly by adopting acceptance tactics.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
In addition to generic metrics, asymmetrical alliances need a performance metric system that
features metrics to capture the sources of bargaining power, including resource contributions and alternatives. For example, partner contributions may change due to learning, which
directly infuences the power relationship. A weaker frm needs to be aware of such shifts.
Depending on the type of tactic used, weaker frms may also employ different metrics. For
example, offensive tactics require active monitoring of contractual fulflment, defensive tactics
need metrics to capture relationship quality and acceptance tactics require output metrics
that can capture the degree of objective achievement over time.Alliance performance metrics
should also centre on alliance process execution, which may be more qualitative and thus
more unambiguous than objective inputs, though these still provide valuable insights into the
actual functioning of the alliance and the extent to which a frm is exploiting its counterpart.
The inherently unstable nature of asymmetrical alliances means that performance metric systems should also include indicators that capture and regulate communication. Representatives
of both organizations would preferably come together to evaluate performance, decide on
corrective actions and communicate decisions across their organizations.

Asymmetrical alliances
219
Step 8: alliance termination
Finally, alliance termination still tends to favour the dominant party, which can use its power advantage to secure exit provisions, explore alternatives and reap the remaining value of the alliance. In
an unintended termination, weaker frms might protect themselves from unilateral termination
with contractual provisions that demand a termination fee if the alliance is dissolved prematurely.
Advance notice agreements in an alliance contract can also postpone any effective termination for a
pre-set period of time, which allows the parties to recoup their contributions and stimulate learning
to maximize the alliance benefts.Another prevention of premature, one-sided alliance termination
demands relationship-specifc investments by all parties.The costs of such investments should arise
only with alliance termination, such that they erect a potential exit barrier. Because these precautions against unintended alliance terminations often require formalization, weaker frms should
ensure that the type and content of exit provisions represent part of their negotiation agenda.

Summary
The danger of misappropriation and sub-optimal value creation makes an interesting challenge for partners in an asymmetrical alliance. They need to exploit their resource asymmetries to create value, but at the same time, they must prevent exploitative moves that often
result from power asymmetries. By taking the dominant frm’s perspective, most mainstream
alliance research focuses on value attainment, but weaker frms can also use offensive and
defensive tactics to secure their share of jointly created value—though not without some risk.
These tactics demand resource commitments and increase confict (i.e. they induce power
use by the dominant frm), which may make acceptance tactics more attractive to the weaker
frms.With such strategies, weaker frms acknowledge their weakness but still extract satisfactory value and thus have good incentives to maintain their asymmetrical alliance relationships.
In practice, however, most frms use some combination of these tactics.

CASE: DISNEY–PIXAR2
In the past two decades, the world of computer animation has witnessed rapid developments. In particular, increasing technological possibilities have radically changed the style
and complexity of animated flms. Furthermore, the markets for these offerings keep changing too, providing great opportunities for new entrants and signifcant potential threats
to existing industry players—such as Walt Disney, the king of the animated movie industry. Familiar characters such as Oswald the Rabbit, Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and Goofy
helped Walt Disney build a business empire held up by four pillars: (1) production and distribution of animated and live-action motion pictures, (2) parks and resorts, (3) consumer
products (i.e. merchandising) and (4) media networks, including ABC and ESPN.
Despite the expansion of the Disney enterprise, its core remained the production of
animated flms. The competence underlying this core contributor also was well set: handdrawn animated fgures. In the face of a technical revolution, however, Disney found it
was lacking competences to generate the sophisticated look and creative approaches that
consumers were demanding. To overcome these challenges, it sought alliance partners to
incorporate new animation technologies into its flm production; Pixar appeared to be an
excellent alliance candidate.

220
Asymmetrical alliances
Begun in 1979 as the Graphics Group, Pixar was part of the Computer Division of Lucasflm before being acquired by Apple co-founder Steve Jobs in 1986 for approximately
$16 million. Pixar focused on the development of computer-animated feature flms that
would target all layers of a society. Its key strengths, creativity and technological ability to
produce computer-animated characters and feature flms helped Pixar develop its frst short
flm in 1987, called Red’s Dream.
Although the companies were about to become partners with closely aligned goals, they
were quite different. Pixar was a young, relatively unknown entrepreneurial company with
a culture renowned for its friendly working environment. Disney was an established multinational with a strongly hierarchical management style and a consistently fnancial focus.
But perhaps the biggest difference was the two frms’ size. Disney was a far bigger company
than Pixar.
The year 1991 started poorly for Pixar, which laid off 30 employees from its computer
department. But the $26 million deal it made with Disney that year to produce three computer-animated feature flms improved the outlook. Despite strong income, however, the
company was still losing money, and Jobs often considered selling it. As late as 1994, Jobs
contemplated selling Pixar to other companies, including Microsoft. Only after confrming
that Disney would distribute Toy Story, the frst feature movie developed by the alliance, for
the 1995 holiday season did he decide to give it another chance. And the flm went on to
gross more than $350 million worldwide.
Following this success, Pixar and Disney signed a co-production–distribution partnership in 1997, agreeing to co-produce fve feature flms. Disney obtained access to Pixar’s
technological competences and creative drive. Beyond reinvigorating the animation genre
with a new visual style, the alliance allowed for more cost-effcient and easy repurposing of
digital content. But perhaps most important, Pixar’s flms provided great storytelling, the
very foundation of Disney’s long-held dominance in the market. Furthermore, with its functioning alliance, Disney could neutralize potential competitors. For Pixar, the partnership
with Disney meant access to the vast Disney production and distribution resources. Pixar
thus could focus on its core competence: producing computer-animated flms. In addition,
Disney offered access to its merchandising knowledge and distribution network, so Pixar
could develop and sell toys, apparel and so on.
Profts and costs were split 50:50. Disney owned all story and sequel rights and also collected a distribution fee. Pixar lived up to its end of the agreement by creating and releasing
A Bug’s Life, Monsters Inc., Finding Nemo, The Incredibles and Cars. The alliance thus provided
production capital to Pixar and distribution fees to Disney. Soon enough, however, the success of these animated flms shifted Pixar’s position; it no longer needed capital because it
could source production and distribution capital more cost effciently if it worked with other
studios. The disagreement that arose surrounding the release of Toy Story 2 exemplifed the
deteriorating alliance conditions.
Originally, Toy Story 2 did not fall under the alliance agreement because the intention
was to release it straight to video rather than in the theatres. But Disney decided to release
Toy Story 2 as a motion picture in theatres, prompting Pixar to demand that Toy Story 2 be
counted as one of its contracted flms. Disney refused. Then Pixar began questioning the
equitability of its arrangements. The distribution fee was growing into an increasing problem for Pixar in that the distribution and merchandising fees ultimately resulted in a 68:32
split of profts in Disney’s favour. As Pixar voiced its concerns, Disney insisted on maintaining
the initial contractual agreement, and the relationship grew more contentious.

Asymmetrical alliances
221
The two companies attempted to reach a new agreement in early 2004. The new deal
would cover only distribution: Pixar proposed that in the revised alliance contract, it would
provide full fnancing for its flms but also be entitled to the full benefts. Disney would
receive only a distribution fee of approximately 10 to 15 per cent of the gross sales. Disney
rejected the proposal. In preparation for the potential fallout, Jobs announced in late 2004
that Pixar would no longer release movies in November, as Disney dictated, but would rather
pursue the more lucrative early summer months, which would enable it to release the DVD
versions just in time for the Christmas shopping season. The possibility that Pixar would
fnd a more cost-effcient distribution arrangement with another studio became too great
a risk for Disney, even if the new distribution arrangement yielded much lower distribution
fees for it. By the time Disney came to this recognition, however, the personal relationship
between Steve Jobs (owner of Pixar) and Michael Eisner (Disney CEO) had deteriorated to
the point that the negotiation ultimately wound up a failure.
Pixar had grown so much by now that it could be self-supporting even after the demise
of its alliance with Disney. Jobs admitted he would be on the lookout for other partners. In
2006, Disney headed off this possibility by acquiring Pixar for $7.4 billion in an all-stock
deal. The acquisition was of the utmost strategic importance to Disney, not only because
of where the distribution relationship with Pixar seemed headed, but also because of Pixar’s
potential value to Disney’s entertainment brand and assets, such as its theme parks and
television, that it needed to keep feeding off this valuable brand.

Questions
1
2
3
What asymmetries appear in the Disney–Pixar alliance? How do they change? To what
extent do they afect the alliance’s power relationship?
In which ways did the dynamic power relationship between Disney and Pixar, and its
management, infuence the alliance development?
Disney paid a high price to acquire Pixar. Could it have done something diferently?

Notes
1 This section builds on prior research with Anoop Madhok (Schulich School of Business), whom we
acknowledge for his contribution.
2 Amazon (2022b); CNNMoney (2004); Fonda (2006); IBS Center for Management Research
(2006); Pixar Planet forum (2008); corporate website: www.pixar.com/companyinfo/ (accessed 2
August 2011).

15
CROSS-SECTOR ALLIANCES
The challenges that societies currently face are highly complex and unprecedented. Many
of these challenges, such as climate change, scarcity of natural resources, increasing globalization, terrorism, poverty and food shortages, cannot be resolved within the public sector alone.
Consequently, collaboration between private frms and public organizations, such as governments, universities and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), has become increasingly
important.These cross-sector alliances (or public–private partnerships) provide opportunities
for partners to share resources and expertise, which allows more effective solutions in keeping
with individual and communal objectives. However, private frms and public organizations
vary in many ways, including societal function, proft and non-proft orientation, accountability and organizational backgrounds, all of which are major causes of alliance instability. If
these differences are not controlled, they will negatively affect the partners’ ability to realize
their individual and collective alliance objectives. Thus, although cross-sector alliances can
enhance a frm’s competitive position, they also present a unique challenge in that frms
wishing to realize their private objectives must reconcile a wide range of differences that give
rise to conficts.The frst section discusses this cross-sector alliance challenge, and the second
section elaborates on the mechanisms that managers can use to deal with it. Next, a crosssector alliance is associated with the alliance development framework to develop guidelines
for decision making (described in the third section).The chapter concludes with a summary
and a case illustration.

The cross-sector alliance challenge
The literature covers a wide range of cross-sector alliances (see Table 15.1), including business–community partnerships, union relationships, NGO–business partnerships, fund-raising
alliances, ethical responsibility networks, voluntary corporate code agreements and cause–
brand alliances (Rondinelli and London 2003;Wood 2002). Each type of cross-sector alliance
is unique and poses distinct barriers to alliance formation and management. For the sake of
brevity, however, this chapter focuses on three prototypical cross-sector alliances: (1) university–
industry partnership, (2) public–private partnership and (3) non-governmental organization–
business partnership (see Chapter 26 for emerging cross-sector alliances).
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-15
Cross-sector alliances
223
TABLE 15.1 Examples of cross-sector alliances
Description
Inditex–Coruna
University
In 2016, Inditex and the University of Coruna signed a collaboration agreement
for the creation of a programme for the recruitment and promotion of
international scientifc researchers.The programme, called InTalent, enables
scientists with a proven track record abroad to carry on their research projects
at the University’s facilities, thereby improving the latter’s faculty and research
capabilities while boosting students’ chances of fnding work and enterprising.

World Wide
Fund for
Nature–Bolton
Food
In 2016, the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Bolton Food entered
into a four-year partnership aimed at helping safeguard a healthy ocean and
the livelihoods of communities that depend on it. In 2020, Bolton Food
(with its brands Rio Mare, Saupiquet, and Isabel) and WWF renewed their
transformational partnership for another four years
(2021–2024) to promote more sustainable fshing activities. In addition, phase II
of the partnership will strengthen advocacy efforts for responsible management
of tuna stocks globally.

CARE–Cargill
CARE and Cargill formed an innovative partnership to fght poverty and
long-term hunger in the developing world. CARE is a leading humanitarian
organization fghting global poverty. Cargill is a multinational corporation that
specializes in agriculture, food and beverage ingredients, meat products, industrial
agricultural and steel products. CARE and Cargill leverage their respective
strengths to improve livelihoods while at the same time improving Cargill’s
competitive advantage. For example, CARE partners with local Cargill teams
provide training, skills development and market access for farmers; enhance
education and nutritional support for children; and organize health care and safe
drinking water for rural communities.

Sources: CSIS News (2011); Inditex.com (2016); Oneworld Trust (2009);WWF (2020).

A university–industry partnership depicts a collaborative agreement between a private frm
and a university that combines resources to create and exchange academic and experiencebased knowledge (Perkmann et al. 2011), often to develop innovative products and services
and/or develop new technologies. For example, pharmaceutical companies, such as GlaxoSmithKline and Novartis, leverage academic knowledge to acquire fundamental expertise in
specifc disease areas. Engineering-based companies such as Rolls Royce work with academic
departments in a variety of felds, including combustion aerodynamics and systems software
engineering. Firms establish alliances with universities for a variety of reasons, all of which
relate directly to their competitive position, including the ability to gain access to scientifc
breakthroughs, state-of-the-art information and training and support for building in-house
skills, as well as to recruit highly qualifed staff, to save costs by delegating research and development activities and to economize on investments in internal facilities (Bonaccorsi and
Piccaluga 2000). In contrast, universities beneft from partnerships with industry through the
additional funding, direct access to hands-on knowledge and expertise, access to case material and facilities (for example, laboratory facilities) and references for future public projects
(Meyer-Krahmer and Smoch 1998).
Public–private partnerships are cooperative institutional arrangements between private frms
and government agencies (Kwak et al. 2009). Governments are challenged to act effectively
in an increasingly complex society that puts a strain on available resources, while gradually
224
Cross-sector alliances
reducing funding. To realize their objectives, governments depend more and more on the
corporate sector. Public–private partnerships enable government agencies and private frms
to work together on such projects as developing and maintaining large infrastructural projects,
including roads, bridges and tunnels. Firms supply specialist construction knowledge, management skills and funding in long-term infrastructure projects commissioned by governments. In
return, private sector actors agree on the commercial exploitation of the project through which
they receive revenues. Public–private partnerships rebalance the division of government and
private responsibilities, allowing governments to reduce spending and implement their policies
simultaneously.When frms in the corporate sector assume responsibilities that were previously
executed by government agencies, they tap into new markets, which leads to extra revenues.
An NGO–business partnership refers to a cooperative arrangement between an NGO and
a private frm that aims to strengthen the frm’s efforts to support its corporate social responsibility policies (Austin 2000) and to improve the NGO’s ability to achieve its idealistic and
communal objectives. The proft-oriented nature and competences of private frms makes
them relatively incapable of dealing with the social and environmental demands of customers,
shareholders and other stakeholders on their own. Consequently, frms forge NGO–business
partnerships to develop a green image; prevent boycotts and protests and circumvent public
pressure; enhance their credibility through voluntary codes of conduct; avoid adverse publicity; improve staff morale, public affairs and public relations; and improve their credibility and
positive reputation (Arya and Salk 2006; Loza 2004). NGOs, on the other hand, rely on the
corporate sector primarily for funding and critical resources.
Although these three types of cross-sector alliances difer from business-to-business alliances in terms of their objectives and partner characteristics (see Table 15.2), they have three
types of confict in common that jeopardize alliance stability without adequate management.
First, institutional conficts are likely to emerge that originate in the diferent functions parties fulfl in society. The objectives of a frm primarily concern proft, while universities
are mainly focused on knowledge production and dissemination. NGOs tend to focus on
social issues (such as poverty and the suppression of minorities), while governments serve the
TABLE 15.2 Cross-sector alliance partners
Government agency
University
Non-governmental
organization
Private frm
Main interest
Public
Intellectual
Charity
Proft
Main source
of income
Community
Government
Donations
Customers
Time horizon
Long term
Long term
Short term
Short term
Focus
Societal and
economic
situation of a
country or region
Knowledge
production and
dissemination
Societal and
economic situation
of a country, region
and minority groups
Discovering and
exploiting market
opportunities
Ranking of
confict
Accountability
Institutional
Intellectual
Intellectual
Institutional
Accountability
Institutional
Accountability
Intellectual
Competitive
Sources:Austin (2000); Kwak et al. (2009); Stafford et al. (2000); Wood (2002).

Cross-sector alliances
225
community. In other words, there is a distinction between proft and non-proft orientation
and between private and public interests. These diverging orientations afect the way representatives perceive themselves and their behaviour. Consider a large infrastructural project,
such as the construction of a highway. Private frms get involved and support the construction of a highway so as to generate revenue; motorists participate constructively because such
projects tend to reduce travel times, but environmentalists are likely to resist because highways
often imply negative consequences for ecosystems. Thus, decision-making in cross-sector
alliances is impeded owing to diferent institutional backgrounds.
Second, an accountability confict may emerge, referring to differences in how partners
need to deal with fnancial responsibilities and reporting. Universities, government agencies
and NGOs rely primarily on a variety of stakeholders to provide funding. Such variety in the
sources of (public) funding, along with the social pressures imposed on public organizations,
increases the need for accountability and transparency but also makes it complicated to assign
accountability. In contrast, private frms are primarily accountable to owners, shareholders and
external regulative entities. Partners in cross-sector alliances have varying requirements for
accountability, which means that their stance towards the partnership is likely to differ in that
they demand different fnancial infrastructures.The need to comply with distinct internal and
external requirements complicates alliance design decisions as well as ex-post modifcations.
This disparity in funding and accountability can lead to tensions between partners.
The third type of confict is the intellectual confict that often exists between partners
in cross-sector alliances. Research institutes, in keeping with their role in society, attempt to
share their research fndings with a larger audience, whereas a private frm that shares intellectual property could lose its competitive edge. Similarly, knowledge and technology developed
through public funding, such as is the case in public–private partnerships, should be openly
available (sometimes free) to the public; frms, on the other hand, would prefer to acquire and
protect unique assets to strengthen their position in the market. For example, intellectual conficts tend to characterize cross-sector alliances between pharmaceuticals and universities. Due
to the high costs of R&D activities and the increasing speed of technological change, pharmaceutical companies collaborate with research institutions that possess state-of-the-art knowledge and facilities. Whereas frms strive to protect intellectual capital, specifcally if research
output undermines claims about the effectiveness of new medicines, universities are inclined
to disseminate knowledge—sometimes having been forced to do so by specifc legislation.
Similarly, intellectual conficts may arise in NGO–business and public–private partnerships.
In summary, partners in a cross-sector alliance face challenges that are inherently tied to
this type of partnering. Differences in partners’ societal functions, proft orientation, organization design and culture, and incentive systems form critical obstacles for win–win cross-sector
alliances.The repercussions of these dissimilarities manifest themselves in divergent objectives,
different time horizons and context-specifc languages that, if left unresolved, can lead to
institutional, accountability and intellectual conficts. For example, whereas universities are
supposed to act as independent societal institutes with a long-term orientation to generate
high-quality knowledge in relatively stable environments, frms operate in highly competitive
environments with short-term orientations and a focus on proft making, knowledge protection and the commercial value of knowledge. Due to these differences, the objectives of all
parties can be met only to a limited extent, and the challenge for alliance management is to
fnd an optimal trade-off solution in which each party can improve its pay-off without damaging the interests of its counterpart. In other words, partners in cross-sector alliances face the
challenge of reconciling private interests with communal interests.

226
Cross-sector alliances
Managing cross-sector alliances
The management of cross-sector alliances requires partners to identify differences proactively
and to understand how these differences give rise to conficts and what initiatives they can
develop to reconcile these differences in order to reduce the probability of conficts (London
et al. 2006).This section presents three areas that managers may focus on in order to steer their
cross-sector alliance towards success. These are (1) enforcing power neutrality, (2) creating
autonomy and transparency and (3) building a culture of collaborative commitment.

Power neutrality
Heterogeneous resources, competences and alternatives make it unlikely that partners in a
cross-sector alliance will have balanced power positions. However, successful cross-sector alliances are often characterized by power neutrality, which means that partners’ participation in
communication is democratic. All parties involved in discussions about the partnership must
have an equal voice in determining the outcomes, even if one of them (often the private
frm) possesses a power advantage. In order to achieve commitment and constructive collaboration, partners must create a context that is free of coercion and the fear of retaliation.
To develop a platform for power-neutral discussions, partners may use defensive, offensive
and acceptance tactics (see Chapter 14). However, whereas the frst two tactics are likely to
ignite a power struggle, the use of acceptance tactics is more likely to contribute to a stable
partnership; by using acceptance tactics, partners recognize that all interests are best served on
egalitarian grounds. For example, Starbucks and Conservation International formed an alliance to encourage environmentally friendly coffee.Although Starbucks’ strong position in the
coffee market provided it with a power advantage, it did not exercise (or threaten to exercise)
this power in an attempt to hinder Conservation International’s attempts to achieve its own
objective (Austin 2000). Failure by any partner to realize and accept some degree of power
neutrality is likely to hamper the performance of the alliance.

Autonomy and transparency
Autonomy of the partners and transparency in cross-sector alliances is important for creating a
climate in which parties can deal actively with potential conficts. Autonomy refers to the extent
to which a participant should have an equal opportunity to express its interests and be able to
question the assertions made by any other participant.When a partner cannot participate fully
in the discussion, its autonomy becomes jeopardized, which constrains its efforts to advocate
its individual or communal interests. For example, Macdonald and Chrisp (2005) described an
alliance between a pharmaceutical frm and a charity organization that encouraged teenagers
to lead healthier lives. One reason the alliance failed is because the pharmaceutical frm gained
dominance and suppressed the charity, driving the partnership towards the achievement of its
own private interests rather than being concerned with the interests of the partnership or the
charity. Recognizing the need for autonomy requires managers to plan and invest resources
carefully to enable and facilitate dialogue and discussion. A win–win cross-sector alliance can
only be established when all partners are equally able to express their interests fully.
Transparency suggests that partners are able to communicate in such a way that makes
other members aware of their positions, goals and interests.This applies not only to the partners involved in the alliances but also to external stakeholders.Although there is no clear way
Cross-sector alliances
227
of guaranteeing transparency within a single discussion, ongoing interaction over time can
provide the conditions in which the true motives of the stakeholders become exposed (Reynolds and Yuthas 2008).This notion of transparency conficts somewhat with alliance practices
within business-to-business settings. During alliance negotiations, for example, companies
tend to withhold critical information to secure private interests. In the pharmaceutical–
charity alliance described previously, partners agreed openly on certain private interests (the
pharmaceutical sought public relations and the charity sought funding), but the parties did
not acknowledge the fact that their fundamental intentions were causing conficts as the
alliance progressed. Transparency requires an ongoing, iterative dialogue between partners
and their stakeholders as discussion exposes each partner’s position, interests and intentions.

A culture of collaborative commitment
In the context of cross-sector alliances, it is important that partners share fundamental values
and beliefs if they are to reduce the risk of potential conficts, or to resolve them effectively
once they have emerged (Barroso-Méndez et al. 2016). A culture of collaborative commitment enables partners to become aware of and reconcile diverging values. However, it can be
diffcult to build and maintain a culture of collaborative commitment because it requires staff
to be aware of individual dispositions and those of their counterparts. Developing and maintaining a collaborative commitment culture does not happen by organizational decree alone.
It must be interwoven into all aspects of the partners’ organizations and into the alliance.This
new or modifed culture must start with a focus on internal and external stakeholders as it is
they who must embrace the alliance’s intended direction. For example, if a frm and a university acknowledge different time horizons, they may agree to postpone publication of research
output in order to provide the frm with an opportunity to exploit this knowledge by staying
ahead of its competitors. Building a culture of collaborative commitment in a cross-cultural
alliance requires partners to focus on the following factors.
Employees and senior management from partner organizations should support the alliance’s
objectives. Management plays a powerful role in the process of establishing a collaborative
culture within a cross-sector alliance as it ensures the credibility of the push for collaborative
behaviour (Noble and Jones 2006). Management must be perceived to support the collaboration both publicly and privately. A project champion who supports the alliance may serve as
an example to other members of the staff. In addition, designating boundary spanners enables
a frm to lay a foundation for collective sense-making activities that reinforce the development of a collaborate culture. Partners should use an employment selection process for participating in the alliance in order to prevent the inclusion of people who are unsupportive of
the alliance’s objectives. For example, staff can be selected by conducting a test that taps into
the congruency between their value systems and that of the alliance. Furthermore, the initial
stage of involvement in the alliance is the best time to start instilling the collaborative commitment culture into alliance staff. It is not enough simply to impart information about the
existence of collaborative values.Through training and education, alliance staff must be made
aware that collaborative behaviour is the foundation for the alliance and should be manifested
in all its activities. An education programme designed to understand and subsume fully the
alliance philosophy on collaborative commitment practices and behaviour may fulfl this purpose.This programme should be formally endorsed by the alliance and should explain to all
levels of alliance participants the importance in being collaborative, not only for the beneft of
228
Cross-sector alliances
their organizations but also to enhance alliance performance. Hence, it is desirable to establish
an ‘education committee’ that can not only coordinate but also monitor the level of education
and the subsequent exposure to and awareness of collaborative issues.
In addition, partners may introduce a code of conduct that serves as an instrument to enhance
awareness and helps organizations reduce and/or deal with conficts of interest in a constructive manner (Harrington 1991).Within the context of a cross-sector alliance, a code of conduct
should be developed that has both an internal and external focus.An external code of collaborative commitment provides guidelines for how to interact with various stakeholders connected
with the partners and the alliance.This also contributes to transparency in their communication to other members outside the alliance. An internal code targets employees who work at
all levels within the alliance and aims to provide guidance to staff when they face conficts of
interest during day-to-day operations.The process of developing a collaborative culture can be
enhanced only if all parties are consulted and agree on the collaborative stance of the alliance.

Cross-sector alliances: decision-making steps
Cross-sector alliances are unique because the partners are likely to have noticeable differences
in terms of their societal functions, incentive systems, organization cultures, decision-making
styles, time horizons and professional languages. Cross-sector alliances are diffcult to realize
and tend to result in minimal joint decision making and continuity in cooperation owing to
inherent conficts between the partners.To assist alliance managers, the next section provides
guidelines for each stage of the alliance development framework when forging successful
cross-sector alliances (see Figure 15.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the strategic analysis stage, a frm will decide whether a cross-sector alliance is an
appropriate governance mode to realize its objectives. Although generic rationales such as
transaction costs, resource complementarities and resource dependence inform governance
mode choice, an alliance is most likely to be the preferred alternative owing to the partners’ distinct backgrounds. For example, a merger between a university and a private frm is
unlikely because the two parties fulfl different functions in society.A market exchange is also
improbable because state-of-the-art academic knowledge is often not commoditized.
Alternatively, a cross-sector alliance enables a frm to exploit effciently the synergies
obtained through collaboration with a public organization. However, to complete its strategic
analysis a frm may wish to include a stakeholder analysis. An effective cross-sector alliance
strategy fts with a frm’s environment to accommodate the demands of external stakeholders, comply with social pressures and capitalize on contextual opportunities. This requires
conscious decision-making, both from the private frm and from the public organization
considering a cross-sector alliance.Whereas a private frm must assess the extent to which a
partnership strengthens its competitive position, a public organization must evaluate whether
its interests are best served by a cross-sector alliance. Moreover, public organizations must
often adhere to laws and regulations that limit the room in which they can manoeuvre. Private frms must also take certain risks into account, such as changes in law, public acceptance
and government.These could impact such areas as increased operating costs to comply with
new laws, adverse effects on quality and service delivery and/or additional operating costs and
time delay.These aspects need to be incorporated in the strategic analysis.

Cross-sector alliances
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
229
Internal development, merger and acquisition, and market exchange
are unsuited governance modes, given partner’s unique backgrounds.
Formulate alliance strategy consistent with firm’s strategy;
incorporate interests of stakeholders and risks related to cross-sector
alliances, and communicate intentions to all stakeholders.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Conduct stakeholder analysis and extend partner selection criteria
with indicators such as fundamental values, culture and experience.
Assess the extent to which a potential partner is willing to invest in a
collaborative commitment culture.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Negotiators should focus on dialogue and communication to create
transparency, autonomy and openness to share interests; lays
foundation for creating and maintaining collaborative commitment
culture.

4
Alliance
design
non–equity-based arrangement is preferred governance form due to
partners’ diverging backgrounds and societal functions.
Contractual provisions should embody decision-making procedures,
accountability procedure and intellectual property specifications;
design a code of conduct and specify how to select alliance staff.

5
Alliance
launch
6
Alliance
management
Explicate organizational differences (e.g. societal function, processes
and way of working) to create awareness and sensitivity among
alliance staff.
Stimulate immediate and frequent communication to enable learning,
promote joint-sense making and build trust.
Facilitate dialogues, communication and discussions to create
transparency, autonomy and collaborative commitment culture.
Engage in continuous interaction with internal and external
stakeholders.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing
potential areas of conflict: institutional, accountability and
intellectual; add metrics capturing the quality of internal and external
communication as well as stakeholder responses.

8
Alliance
termination
Refrain from using bargaining power advantage, as power neutrality
is critical to achieve favorable termination outcomes and processes.
Communicate in a transparent way to all stakeholders how and why
the alliance is terminated.

FIGURE 15.1
Alliance development framework: cross-sector alliances
Step 2: alliance partner selection
Owing to varying interests, objectives and organizational backgrounds, partner ft can be
deemed low in most cross-sector alliances. Consequently, partner selection becomes a critical
activity as recognizing areas of incompatibility—which include strategic, organizational, cultural, operational and human areas—allows partners to develop corrective measures. For example, managers must consider whether the partners’ organizational missions match, whether the
alliance is equally important to both partners, whether partners’ needs and capabilities can be
230
Cross-sector alliances
integrated and whether the partners share values. In addition, partner analysis may focus on
earlier partnership experience and partnering culture as prior successful cross-sector alliances
are indicative for future successes.An existing collaborative commitment culture or a willingness to build will reduce the likelihood of conficts. More specifcally, the cultural ability to
appreciate different environments and the ability to adapt accordingly is an important partnering criterion. In addition, partner analysis may focus on fexibility, as the willingness of partners to adapt to existing and unforeseen circumstances is an important condition to success.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
In order to achieve mutual collaborative commitment, partners in a cross-sector alliance must
recognize the problems within their power relationship and also take precautions to neutralize
power imbalances that may affect the fundamental purposes of their alliance.Thus, in addition
to the generic negotiation guidelines, the negotiation approach should preferably be integrative and accompanied by soft tactics. It is important to obtain agreement on how to stimulate
all participants and reward them for expressing their interests and objectives openly, as well as
to make assertions and question the assertions of others. Moreover, the partners should openly
explain their positions, goals and interests, both to each other and to the ‘outside world’. Such
transparency and openness during alliance negotiations foster alliance progress and performance, and frms must suppress the pressure to engage in distributive tactics.This means that
partners should use acceptance tactics that recognize the fact that all interests are best served
on egalitarian grounds.

Step 4: alliance design
Like the rationale of avoiding mergers and acquisitions, cross-sector alliances tend to be most
effciently governed through non-equity-based arrangements that are supplemented with
specifc contractual provisions and management control. Whereas the alliance’s governance
form and management control mechanism should be consistent with generic guidelines
in cross-sector alliance, particular focus should be given to contractual provisions and control mechanisms that deal with potential conficts. More specifcally, the following elements
should be embodied in an alliance design if possible:
•
•
•
•
Agreement on the decision-making procedures. For example, decision-making speed is
critical as public and private organizations often have different requirements. Failure to
manage these differences can translate into high levels of frustration, possibly damaging
collaborative efforts.
Agreement on accountability. Whereas public organizations are under public scrutiny
and must adhere to laws and regulations, private frms must satisfy shareholders and other
regulatory requirements.
Contractual provisions, including communication structures, escalation procedures and
confict management structures, must be designed to deal with relational risks in order to
prevent potential damage to the partnership.
Agreement on how to select and monitor employees involved in the alliance.The dispositions of these employees should match the desired collaborative commitment culture.
If necessary, partners should develop and implement a collaborative commitment culture
programme to train and educate staff.

Cross-sector alliances
•
•
•
231
The design of operational procedures must refect the need for interaction and sense
making.Therefore, working in mixed teams is preferable to working in separated teams
that remain organization-specifc.
Constructing a code of collaborative commitment culture, as well as communicating and
discussing this with all participants in the alliance. Besides internal communication, it is
also important to communicate the code to other stakeholders in the environment.
Measures to ensure suffcient power neutrality. Selecting coordinators and staff who are
aware of power-based behaviour makes it possible to deploy adequate countermeasures. It is also important to educate staff to be aware of the consequences of power
abuse.

Step 5: alliance launch
Partnering with a non-proft organization can involve uncertainty for a frm because it
requires working with institutions (e.g. government agencies) that may have complex
decision-making systems and a complex set of interests and objectives. Consequently,
within a cross-sector alliance, employees are challenged to deviate from their normal
intra-organizational routine life and confront a situation that often involves a new and
potentially complex inter-organizational experience. Systemically organizing the alliance
launch is thus critical with regard to a cross-sector alliance as employees may possess a
naturally hostile disposition towards the rival partner. Often the cross-sector partner has
been portrayed as an adversary, and suddenly it is expected of staff to collaborate. The
various motivations, organizational cultures and value patterns of the public and private
sectors would be expected to give rise to management challenges that are not normally
associated with private–private or public–public partnerships.As part of the alliance launch
strategy, launch managers should attempt to remove any misconceptions and prejudices.
Launch managers should provide employees with suffcient time to become familiar with
the collaborative commitment culture. In addition, they should inform staff at all levels
about the motives for the alliance relationship. As part of operational plans, organizing
efforts should focus on aligning the partners (e.g. based on partner ft analysis) and on
creating clarity about what is expected from staff with regard to skills, communication,
interaction and collaborative behaviours.

Step 6: alliance management
In managing a cross-sector alliance, continued understanding of the backgrounds and interests
of one’s partners allows participants to act and react better, which improves the management
interventions and quality of the working relationship.This is also the perfect time to try and
mould employees into the alliance’s culture. In addition to generic management guidelines,
alliance managers should therefore facilitate and monitor dialogue and discussion between
the partners in order to create an environment that fosters autonomous behaviour. During
progress meetings, for instance, the chair should ensure that participants are able to express
their interests and question claims made by others. It is also important to stimulate continuous interaction with external stakeholders based on transparency and openness. Partners may
create a common website about the alliance that presents the goals, participants, their roles,
events and news on a regular basis.

232
Cross-sector alliances
Step 7: alliance evaluation
Cross-sector alliances are established to reach certain objectives. The performance metric
system can be augmented with additional indicators that tap into these objectives, such as
customers’ awareness and funding. In addition, metrics may capture the potential conficts
that are likely to emerge. For example, indicators may concern the extent to which participants are satisfed with how they dealt with intellectual and accountability issues, how they
cope with or respect each other’s interests and how they handle external stakeholders. Performance metric systems may also include indicators that capture the collaborative culture,
such as partner frms’ behaviour, in terms of the extent to which management and employees
behave according to the collaborative commitment culture; how open communication is; and
whether partners have the opportunity to express their interests and objectives. Metrics may
also ascertain the extent to which partners are suffciently transparent about their position,
goals and interests to external stakeholders, and whether potential power differences have
been neutralized.

Step 8: alliance termination
The duration of the agreement and the termination provisions are important because such
items affect the parties’ ability to escape from cross-sector alliance arrangements that turn
out to be harmful to the business, or simply not as effective or proftable as other stakeholders might have expected. Because of the desire for transparency, it is important to
communicate to the external environment why and how the alliance is being terminated.
It is important to refrain from using power to attain favourable termination outcomes as
retaining power neutrality will increase the likelihood of avoiding barriers for future crosssector alliances.

Summary
Alliances between private frms and public organizations, such as governments, universities
and non-governmental organizations, have become increasingly important for dealing with
society’s challenges. These cross-sector alliances provide opportunities to align resources to
achieve individual and communal objectives. However, uncertainty and ambiguity can be
expected to increase when people with different backgrounds and cultures interact with each
other. A lack of mutual understanding, varying interpretations and different ways of doing
things might lead to frustration that could ultimately damage and possibly jeopardize the partnership. Managers may deal with the promises and perils of cross-sector alliances by adopting
a power-neutral stance, emphasizing autonomy and transparency and building a culture of
collaborative commitment.

CASE: MARKS & SPENCER–OXFAM1
The average UK household has about £4,000 of garments hanging in the wardrobe. Approximately 30 per cent of this clothing has not been worn for over a year, mostly due to the fact
that it no longer fts. This amounts up to £30 billion of unused clothing. Roughly 31 per
Cross-sector alliances
233
cent of these clothes are thrown away and end up as landfll, amounting to roughly £10 billion of good-quality clothes. At the same time, there is a high demand for good-quality
second-hand clothing, both in the UK and abroad, especially in developing countries. The
ability to get access to good-quality second-hand clothing can fulfl demand at the same
time as reducing pollution. That is why Marks & Spencer and Oxfam joined forces in their
alliance called Shwopping.
Oxfam was established in 1942 as the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief by a group of
Quakers, social activists and Oxford academics. This group campaigned for food supplies to
be sent through the allied naval blockage in order to feed the starving population of Greece.
After the Second World War, the organization started to expand, and its frst overseas Oxfam
was founded in Canada in 1963. The organization changed its name to Oxfam in 1965.
Oxfam is currently an international confederation of 18 organizations, working together
with partners and local communities in more than 90 countries. The mission of Oxfam is to
relieve people from poverty. To do so, Oxfam fnds practical and innovative ways to enable
people to lift themselves out of poverty.
Marks & Spencer (M&S) is a major British multinational retailer. Founded in Leeds
in 1884 by Michael Marks and Thomas Spencer, the company grew quickly, focusing
mainly on the sale of clothes and food. Offering fair value for money was always a key
feature for M&S, which established long-lasting partnerships with suppliers in order
to do this. The company experienced healthy growth but went through tough times
in the late 1990s. In 2004, a hostile takeover bid was made, which led to a change in
leadership and a rebalanced strategy. Although the takeover bid was fought off, the new
strategy also incorporated setting higher standards with regard to environmental and
societal consciousness. Due to growing pressure on natural resources and poor global
stewardship, M&S risked an increased cost base, growing diffculties in getting access
to raw materials and increased volatility in the M&S global supply chain. To counter
these threats, M&S launched its ‘Plan A’ in 2007. The goal of Plan A is to make M&S
the world’s most sustainable retailer and improve the protection of the planet and its
communities.
An important part of Plan A is to work with partners in order to realize the ethical and
environmental goals that have been set. One such partner is Oxfam. Oxfam aspires to make
a positive impact on relieving the world from poverty. It believes that this goal can only be
achieved through the collective efforts of many actors. Therefore, partnerships are pivotal in
this strategy. Oxfam seeks partners that are effective at alleviating the root causes of poverty.
It is important for Oxfam that partnerships are built on a shared vision of a fair world that is
free of poverty and injustice.
Oxfam sells second-hand clothing in the UK to attract fnances to fund its activities across
the globe. However, the supply of good-quality clothes has become a problem. Goodquality clothes are essential for Oxfam. Approximately 80 per cent of Oxfam’s income is
generated from income received from items sold in its stores. Good-quality clothes generate
regular visiting customers for Oxfam, ensuring a stable cash fow.
Following the Plan A principles, M&S formulated the ambition to recycle one piece of
clothing for each item it sells. Oxfam and M&S were already in contact about opportunities
to improve the supply chain and ensure that the clothing it sold was meeting the highest
ethical and environmental standards. In 2008, the two parties decided to embark on a partnership called ‘Shwopping’. Shwopping aims to change consumer behaviour by emphasizing recycling in a very consumer-friendly manner.

234
Cross-sector alliances
In practice, Shwopping works in two ways. First, consumers can take any type of clothing to Oxfam stores. If the donated clothes are from M&S, customers receive a £5 voucher,
which can be spent at M&S to buy new clothes. This gets potential customers back to M&S,
ensuring the ‘traffc’ that is highly important for M&S. The second trajectory is that customers can donate any type or brand of clothes directly at M&S stores, and M&S guarantees
that these clothes will be recycled. Good-quality clothes are sent to Oxfam stores. If these
items are not sold at Oxfam stores, Oxfam sends these clothes to developing countries
to support local projects. These local projects drive the local economies and ensure that
people receive income, housing and opportunities to further build on a better future. If the
clothes donated at M&S stores are not ft for sale at Oxfam, M&S will recycle those items.
M&S and Oxfam actively generate attention to Shwopping by having Joanna Lumley, a
well-known British actress, illustrate the relevance of the initiative. By conducting interviews
and travelling to developing countries, Lumley demonstrates the effects of Shwopping. For
M&S, this is effective marketing and helps potential customers into their shops; for this,
Oxfam increases the public awareness for the organization and its ambitions.
In creating and managing partnerships, Oxfam uses clear principles that guide all of its
partnerships with stakeholders and, therefore, also applies to the partnership it has with
M&S. First, Oxfam emphasizes the relevance of a shared vision and shared belief. Partnerships between Oxfam and other organizations need to be built on a shared vision of a
fair world that is free of poverty and injustice. According to Oxfam, this implies solidarity
beyond the implementation of specifc programmes or activities. M&S’s Plan A provides
a solid basis and an institutionalization of the willingness M&S has to contribute to a better world. Oxfam’s second principle is the complementarity of purpose and added value.
Whether it is a short- or long-term partnership, the goals of the partnership should be
clear, as should the contribution and benefts for all partners involved. In the partnership
with M&S, the partnering structures and activities have been articulated well and are
monitored by both M&S and Oxfam. Oxfam realizes that partnerships pose challenges
with regard to aligning interests and views. Therefore, Oxfam has stated that partners
must remain autonomous and independent. Through active communication and alignment in partnership structures, common ground needs to be found upon which the
partnership can be based. This emphasizes a thorough partnership design. The clear and
simple structure of the partnership between M&S and Oxfam ensures clarity regarding
what they share mutually, while both partners remain independent entities.
The partnership has been very successful. Since the partnership began in 2008, right up
to 2021, more than 35 million garments have been donated in M&S and Oxfam Shops,
worth an estimated £22 million for Oxfam. In 2022, as part of the retailer’s Plan A sustainability programme, M&S is calling on customers to donate their used clothing to Oxfam via
its recently refreshed Shwopping scheme. For M&S, the Shwopping concept has generated
increased traffc into its stores; however, it has also ignited other kinds of innovations. Prior
to the launch of the Shwopping concept, M&S had no real reverse supply chain in place
to get clothing back from M&S stores. Also, the clothing recycling industry was still small
in scale and poorly structured. With the Shwopping concept, M&S created new infrastructure that has enabled M&S to reduce costs by sourcing recycled wool and cashmere at
lower prices than new. With Shwopping, M&S has made signifcant steps in realizing its Plan
A ambitions and becoming part of the circular economy.

Cross-sector alliances
235
Questions
1
2
3
Describe the company interests of both Marks & Spencer and Oxfam to participate in
the Shwopping alliance, and compare these to their joint interests. Which tension(s) do
you observe, and how did (or may) the alliance partners deal with them?
Provide a systematic overview of management initiatives Marks & Spencer and Oxfam
implemented to avoid and resolve conficts.
Explain why it would be difcult for competitors and other non-governmental organizations to mimic the success of the Shwopping alliance.

Note
1 Bardsley (2013); M&S (2022); Oxfam (2016a, 2016b, 2021).

16
COOPETITION ALLIANCES
Forging alliance arrangements between competitor frms has become increasingly popular.
These so-called ‘coopetition’ alliances, despite their inherent risks, provide partner frms with
market opportunities and operational synergies extending beyond what partners could have
achieved individually. The risks however, such as loss of proprietary knowledge and escalating conficts, require specifc alliance designs and adequate alliance management. Whereas
alliance relationships between non-rival partners bring forth a tension between cooperation and competition, this tension amplifes when rival frms collaborate (Ryan-Charleton
and Gnyawali 2022). This tension, however, is not unlike the challenges and management
practices associated with learning alliances (see Chapter 11). This is because most coopetition alliances involve, or are exclusively focused on, R&D collaboration. If partners decide
to extend their collaboration beyond pre-competitive co-creation and innovation initiatives,
the potential synergies increase greatly, but these are paralleled by increases in competitive
pressure on the relationship.Without preemptive considerations of these risks, alliance instability and ultimately premature termination is imminent.This chapter frst details coopetition
and its unique challenge (frst section). In the second section, the governance mechanisms
typically associated with coopetition are discussed. Connecting coopetition alliances with
the alliance development framework, we also offer some guidelines for managerial decision
making (third section).We conclude the chapter with a summary (fourthsection) and a case
illustration (ffth section).

The coopetition alliance challenge
We defne coopetition as a business situation in which independent frms collaborate with
one another and co-coordinate activities to achieve mutual goals but simultaneously compete with one another in markets, as well as with other frms (Bengtsson and Kock 2000;
Dorn et al. 2016). Coopetition alliances, also known as horizontal alliances, thus entail
mutually benefcial partnerships with competitors (see Table 16.1 for examples). To reap
the benefts of economies of scale and scope and to seize market opportunities related to
innovations, competitors may collaborate to set new standards and/or integrate existing
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-16
Coopetition alliances
237
TABLE 16.1 Examples of coopetition alliances
Description
Pfzer–BioNtech
In 2020, Pfzer and BioNTech announced a partnership to develop
vaccines to counter the effects of a COVID-19 infection.This
vaccine is based on BioNTech’s mRNA vaccine program. Pfzer paid
BioNTech $185 million upfront and will prefund the development
costs. BioNtech will refund their 50% stake of the development
costs during the commercialization of the vaccine.The vaccine was
introduced in the course of 2020 and received formal FDA approval on
August 23, 2021.

Alliance for open media
In 2015,Amazon, Cisco, Google, Intel, Microsoft, Mozilla and Netfix
announced that they had formed a new open source alliance—the
Alliance for Open Media—with the goal of developing the next
generation of royalty-free video formats, codecs and other related
technologies.

Toyota–Team Japan
In contrary to the fast increasing electrifcation of cars,Toyota Motor
Corporation is seeking carbon neutrality by expanding fuel options
for internal combustion engines.Toyota is partnering with Subaru,
Kawasaki, Mazda and Yamaha to pursue three initiatives: (1) participating
in races using carbon-neutral fuels, (2) exploring the use of hydrogen
engines in two-wheeled and other vehicles and (3) continuing to race
with hydrogen engines. By doing this, the companies want to provide
customers with greater choice.

Sources:Alliance for Open Media (2015); Lardinois (2015); Pfzer (2020); Toyota (2021).

businesses through complementary technologies. Coopetition is therefore frequently
undertaken in industries in which frms have to deal with emerging technologies (i.e. biotechnologies, information and communication technologies, electronics, semiconductors,
etc.).The emerging technologies increase the level of uncertainty on market opportunities
and technology developments, and frms involved in businesses affected by these technologies can manage uncertainty by cooperating with competitors for sharing resources
and spreading risk. Moreover, in industries affected by continued innovation, cooperation
among competitors frequently turns into competition among different ‘networks of innovators’ (Bengtsson and Raza-Ullah 2016) or ‘group-to-group’ competition (Gnyawali and
Park 2011). For example, within the airline industry, multiple groups comprising industry
incumbents are engaged in intense competition.The three dominant groups are Oneworld,
established in 1999, composed of 14 members including British Airways,American Airlines
and Cathay Pacifc; SkyTeam, founded in 2000, composed of 19 members, including KLM,
AirFrance and China Airlines; and (3) the Star Alliance, founded in 1997, composed of 26
members, including Air China, Lufthansa and TAP Portugal. Such rival groups emerge as
partners who are able to share funding and research skills related to technology development and to join efforts to get access to the marketplace. As becomes evident, despite
competitive pressures, the motives for collaborating with competitors are pressing as well
as divers (Bamford et al. 2003; Bengtsson and Kock 2000; Gnyawali and Park 2011; Meena
et al. 2022; Zineldin 2004).

238
Coopetition alliances
Motives
Coopetition may result in economies of scale and enhanced product/service offerings (Gnyawali
and Park 2011). Coopetition between market leaders for example may allow consumers to enjoy
multi-feature products at a reasonable price due to economies of scale, pooling of complementary resources to develop more integrative technologies, reduction of duplication efforts, as well
as intensifed competition. Further economies of scale are attained as rivals combine similar
assets and resources. Examples of economies of scale motives for partnering can be found in the
airline industry as airline companies opt for code-sharing and joint luggage handling. Coopetition is also a way to establish an industry standard. Besides competing to develop new technologies, companies try to shape emerging industry structures and standards required to support
their development and diffusion (Garud 1994).As technological standards and platforms lay the
foundation for new products and services (Geurts et al. 2022; Lei 2003), competitors cooperate with each other to win battles for industry standards and to create industry-wide norms
(Gomes-Casseres 1994). For example, the Flexiblepower Alliance Network wants to contribute
to a renewable energy future by promoting open-source standards for fexible energy demand,
matching the variations in renewable energy, paving the way for a fully renewable energy future
and bringing together seven market-leading partners (Flexiblepower Alliance Network 2016).
All partners add their specifc knowledge/area-of-expertise, market connections and infuence
to co-develop solutions in order to realize their mission. Coopetition may also foster innovation
and learning (Teece 1992).As competitors collaborate, they combine resources and knowledge,
they share risks and R&D funding, and they can bundle their sales and distribution power to
market their innovative products and services. As a result of co-innovation, partners may learn
from one another and thus facilitate their own product/technological development and leverage the knowledge across related businesses within the frms (Gnyawali and Park 2011). Extant
coopetition alliances are forged to achieve economies of scope.These partnerships often provide
opportunities to expand product portfolios and (geographical) markets. For example, integrated
solutions offered by ICT-based alliance partners extend the scope of their service, enhance the
quality of the service offer and improve customer experience. As a consequence, coopetition
alliances tend to reduce market uncertainty, increase market share, generate network effects and
unite critical suppliers (Chiambaretto and Fernandez 2016).
In addition to strategic and economic motives, coopetition alliances provide an excellent
opportunity for competitive benchmarking (Hamel et al. 1989).That is, via an alliance a frm
may obtain information to conduct a legitimate and detailed analysis; systematically calibrate
performance against external targets; learn to use rough estimates to determine where a competitor (or partner) is better, faster or cheaper; translate those estimates into new internal targets; and recalibrate to establish the rate of improvement in a competitor’s performance.The
great advantage of competitive collaboration is that proximity makes benchmarking easier.
Competitive collaboration also provides a way of getting close enough to rivals to predict
how they will behave when the alliance unravels or runs its course (Hamel et al. 1989). How
does the partner respond to price changes? How does it measure and reward executives?
How does it prepare to launch a new product? By revealing a competitor’s management
orthodoxies, collaboration can increase the chances of success in future head-to-head
battles. Because of the interaction between alliance partners, information can fow about future
directions and plans and the strengths and weakness of the organizations. A partner could,
for example, predict future moves and could take advantage of its counterpart’s weaknesses.
A coopetition alliance thus provides a way of getting close to rivals without raising suspicion.

Coopetition alliances
239
Barriers
Besides the potential benefts, coopetition alliances are inherently tied to burdens, adversities and conficts (Bamford et al. 2003). In non-rival alliances, the cooperation–competition
dilemma is always present, yet in coopetition alliances the impact of the dilemma is amplifed
(Geurts et al. 2022). Enacting rivalry is what partners have been doing before they forged an
alliance relationship. Despite strong motives to collaborate, partners may fnd it diffcult to
view their rival counterparts differently. It is the common and continued practice of competitive acts that potentially jeopardizes alliance stability and performance. Another barrier
preventing partners from attaining their objectives pertains to the threat of leaking unique
knowledge and technology. For example, through coopetition core technologies, processes or
knowledge may fall into your competitor’s hand. Because of this, this competitor can use it
in his competition against you. However, this ‘being out-learned and out-competed’ barrier
is multifaceted (Hamel et al. 1989).Whereas top management puts together strategic alliances
and sets the legal parameters for exchange, the nature and degree of knowledge exchange
is determined by day-to-day interactions of engineers, marketers and product developers.
Whereas managers operating at the organizational level, for example, squabble over sharing
and protecting fnancial data, at the operational team level, critical and technical information
is exchanged.That is, the most important deals may be struck four or fve organizational levels
below where the deal was signed, and it is here where a coopetition alliance is challenged.
Coopetition may also generate lock-in effects and reduce fexibility and adaptability (Zineldin 2004). For example, if two competitors are committed to an existing technology and
new technologies emerge, coopetition acts as a barrier to withdrawing from the relationship.
Decision-making tends to slow down to deal with the adversity, which implies that the partners’ fexibility and adaptability diminishes. If one of the partners decides to withdraw from
the (unproductive) relationship, its counterpart may feel betrayed by the prospect of losing the
investments made in the relationship, and thus reputational damages are created (Gnyawali and
Park 2011). Coopetition may also act as a signal to customers (Bamford et al. 2003).When participating in an alliance with a competitor, current and potential customers of the organization
can switch to the counterpart. Contact moments may occur, customer information may be
exchanged, and a risk exists that the partner will use its increased brand awareness, customer
understanding and direct personal relationship to steal customers away at some future date.
To effectively and effciently deal with these barriers—and capture synergies—coordination
costs need to be incurred. Given coopetition experience levels, the costs for managing a partnership between rivals may outweigh the possible benefts (Zineldin 2004). A coopetition
strategy may incur too many costs in coordinating and controlling the cooperation and competition tensions, adversities and conficts (Bengtsson and Kock 2000). Time and resources
have to be devoted to learning about each other, coordinating activities with the potential
partner and carrying out the adaptations needed to maintain and enhance the relationship.
Those adaptations—technological, economic, cultural, psychological or administrative—also
require resource mobilization. The predicted return on such investment is, however, highly
uncertain.A coopetition relationship may be managed so poorly that a strategic opportunity is
lost. If organizations become more dependent on other parties, their vulnerability may increase.
To conclude, coopetition alliances are complex as they consist of two diametrically different
logics of interaction (Bengtsson and Kock 2000; Geurts et al. 2022). Parties on the one hand
engage in a competitive logic due to conficting interests within and outside the partnership,
and on the other hand, they embrace a cooperative logic due to shared and common interests
240
Coopetition alliances
(Rai 2016).These two logics of interaction are in confict with each other. For example, a rival
partner may invest in an alliance relationship to promote joint innovation but simultaneously
enact aggressive competitive acts outside the partnership.A rival partner may act collaboratively
but simultaneously seek to obtain private benefts (i.e. market knowledge) to enhance its competitive position. Or, a rival partner may promote joint learning while simultaneously enacting
a learning race. If not properly managed (i.e. separated from one another), these tensions may
culminate in dysfunctional process and outcomes and thus undermine alliance continuity.
Simultaneously sharing and protecting the drivers of competitive advantages (e.g. resources
and knowledge) is critical in coopetition alliances.The main issue is how competitors within
an alliance can resist acting in confict with each other to get the alliance to work. In order to
succeed in terms of coopetition, partners must wisely manage the risks of coopetition.

Managing coopetition alliances
The management of coopetition alliances includes activities designed to reconcile the tensions between collaboration and competition—a prerequisite of the long-term viability of a
coopetition alliance (Dorn et al. 2016; Stadtler and Van Wassenhove 2016).Taking a parsimonious view, managerial attention may focus on two sets of pre-emptive measures: alliance and
organization-based measures. See Table 16.2 for an overview.

Alliance-based measures
Alliance design measures pertain to mechanisms that are part of alliance governance yet
employed in such a way that they stimulate cooperative behaviour and mitigate the risk of
competitive behaviour. One critical measure which a rival partner can use to organize the
alliance’s activities pertains to formalizing the alliance scope. Scope refers to the boundaries of
alliance of geography, product categories, customer segments, brands, technologies and fxed
assets (Khanna et al. 1998). Partners must identify the activities in which the alliance may engage
(Gnyawali and Park 2011). A narrow alliance scope implies that rival partners have suffcient
overlapping and complementary activities to generate common benefts but that (unwanted)
appropriation of private benefts (i.e. spillovers) is constrained. For example, the alliance might
cover a single technology rather than an entire range of technologies, involve part of a product
line rather than the entire line and distribute in a limited number of markets or for a limited
period of time.As part of scoping, rival partners may also opt to work with a black box (Bamford
et al. 2003).That is, one partner provides a fnished component to its counterpart who agrees to
not reverse engineer the component (i.e. not to open the black box). A related approach is to
contribute competencies or a bundle of skills rather than disaggregated skills or assets. Bundles
of competencies are extremely hard for partners to replicate. Alternatively, rival partners may
stipulate that the objective of the partnership is strictly pre-competitive and thus, for example,
limited to research and development activities. Once the partners have developed the product/
service, they are allowed to approach the market individually. How the alliance is scoped (i.e.
broad or narrow) may have implications for specifc contractual stipulations. Clauses about present and future intellectual propriety rights are critical as they specify which partner contributes
what knowledge, how this knowledge can be used and, if new knowledge is generated, who
the proprietary owner is. Also, it implies that contractual clauses about market exclusivity (e.g.
product and geography) are relevant to avoid future adversities. Limiting the alliance scope is
thus a means to obtain control over information, knowledge and resource fows (Khanna 1998).

Coopetition alliances
241
TABLE 16.2 Managing coopetition alliances
Focus
Measure
Example application
Alliance scope
Limit collaborative activities to pre-competitive R&D
and/or specifc geographical areas, product categories and
technologies.

Incentive scheme
Create a hybrid compensation structure: provide
incentives for long-term collaboration, and reduce
incentives for short-term competition.

Decision making
Install decision-making and monitoring structures aligned
with joint interests to reduce information asymmetry
between alliance partners.

Behavioural rules
Create guidelines for alliance staff describing what they
can and cannot share with their counterparts.

Alliance climate
Develop a climate of psychological safety in which
partners openly collaborate and proactively deal with
competitive tensions and adversities.

Management support
Enact partners’ top management support to set exemplary
behaviour and reduce partners’ proclivity to attribute
more weight to private than to common interests.

Third-party mediation
Resolve conficts and tensions between rival partners in
a neutral and objective manner via third parties.

Prospecting
Continue to search for (new) win–win synergies as
capturing such emergent opportunities extends the
viability and longevity of the coopetition alliance.

Chinese wall
Compartmentalization of alliance and non-alliance
activities protects against unwanted knowledge and
resource loss while securing contributions to alliance.

Gate keeper
Appoint boundary-spanning agents who monitor
information sharing, track resource fow and inform
alliance management in case of adversities.

Selection & training
Selection and training of staff assigned to the alliance is
critical to generate a collective understanding about what
can and cannot be exchanged.

Coopetition capability
Learn from prior coopetition experiences to develop
a coopetition capability; a capability which in turn
enhances the effcacy of alliance management initiatives.

Alliance
Design
Management
Organization
Design
Management
As part of alliance design, it is also critical to create an adequate incentive scheme (Bamford
et al. 2003).That is, a hybrid compensation structure—inherently part of an equity arrangement or formalized in a non-equity arrangement—provides partners with incentives for
long-term collaboration and reduces their incentives for short-term competition.

242
Coopetition alliances
For example, in the Samsung–Sony alliance, partners agreed to cross-license patents, which
in addition to offering mutual incentives, stimulated knowledge sharing and product development, while protecting their core proprietary technology (Gnyawali and Park 2011). Moreover, as part of the alliance contract, formal (fnancial) sanctions may be applied if a partner
violates contractual stipulations.As part of the design, clarity in the decision-making structure
is critical. Without this decision making, everything procrastinates, contributing to a slow
deterioration of the relationship. During alliance design, it is thus important to identify the
set of the most important decisions the alliance will encounter and then defne which decision makers participate in the formulation and execution of these decisions.The monitoring
structure needs to be aligned with the decision-making structure. Rival partners may also create guidelines and rules for employees working in the alliance that describe what they can and
cannot share/discuss with the partners.This is a way to reduce unwanted information leakage.
Alliance management measures pertaining to activities form part of formal and informal
governance, used in such a way that they mitigate competitive and stimulate cooperative
behaviours. Of utmost importance to creating a successful coopetition alliance is to build a
constructive alliance climate (Gnyawali and Park 2011; Hamel et al. 1989).That is, for mutual
benefts and interests to be achieved, it is imperative that partners communicate, cooperate
and compete in an atmosphere of frank debate, trust, interdependence and mutual positive
expectation. Such a climate enables partners to anticipate tensions, handle conficts and deal
with adversities to create value together and appropriate an equitable share (Stadtler and Van
Wassenhove 2016). A win–win approach of open-minded executives is critical for success
(Hamel et al. 1989). Organizing top management support is a way to show the organization the importance of the alliance (Gnyawali and Park 2011). This in turn could reduce
opportunistic behaviour of employees. Appointing a third party to oversee the alliance signals neutrality and objectivity. Alternatively, an independent facilitator could be assigned to
manage tensions between the partners.To enhance the value of the alliance, prospecting, the
continuing search for win–win synergies and opportunities, depicts a powerful management
tool.The creation of new areas of collaboration as the relationship progresses implies that the
rival partners are able to create more value together, which reduces competitive pressures.

Organization-based measures
When engaged in a coopetition alliance, it is critical that a frm keeps developing resource and
capabilities internally to maintain its competitive position relative to its competitors (Gnyawali
and Park 2011). For example, Samsung developed LED technology, which was a critical factor
in solidifying its competitive position. Ownership and continued development of the technology enabled Samsung to effectively collaborate with its rival Sony. In addition, frms may install
a variety of structural measures to adapt their internal structure in such a way that competitive
forces are mitigated and cooperation is stimulated. Internally building a Chinese wall for example depicts an effective design solution to separate the management of a coopetition alliance
from other parts of the organization. It allows an organization to scope information (Hamel
et al. 1989) such that it determines which information can be shared with a rival and which
not. Ultimately, this compartmentalization protects against unwanted information and resource
leakage to the competitors, while simultaneously relevant assets are contributed to the alliance.
Appointing a gate keeper, whose main task is to monitor information and knowledge exchange
(Hamel et al. 1989), is one way to internally deal effectively with coopetition alliances (Bamford
Coopetition alliances
243
et al. 2003).A gate keeper is acting as an information funnel to and from the partner. Limiting
unintended transfers at the operating level requires careful attention to the role of gatekeepers,
the people who control what information fows to a partner. A gatekeeper can be effective
only if there are a limited number of gateways through which a partner can access people
and facilities. Collegiality is a prerequisite for collaborative success, but too much collegiality
should set off warning bells to senior managers. CEOs or division presidents should expect
occasional complaints from their counterparts about the reluctance of lower level employees
to share information.That’s a sign that the gatekeepers are doing their jobs. It is also part of the
gatekeeper’s task to update senior management regularly and to debrief operating personnel
to fnd out what information the partner is requesting and what requests are being granted.
To support gatekeepers, some organizations establish a clearinghouse to collect and disseminate acquired information from the partner and the alliance (Hamel et al. 1989). In a
clearing house, gatekeepers regularly contact all employees involved in alliances in order
to identify what information has been collected by whom and then pass it on to appropriate departments. Furthermore, regular meetings where employees share new (alliance)
knowledge enable gatekeepers to determine who is best positioned to acquire additional
information. Organization management measures pertain to activities an organization initiates to deal internally with coopetition alliances. Organizations may develop specifc selection and training practices. For example, they may limit the number of employees working
in an alliance and only select employees with a profound understanding of coopetition
hazards. Firms successfully collaborating with rivals inform employees at all levels about
what skills and technologies are off-limits to the partner and monitor what the partner
requests and receives (Hamel et al. 1989). Therefore, tailored training programmes targeting employees participating in a coopetition alliance may, for example, detail how to deal
with coopetition challenges, how to enact the rules of engagement and how to deal with
privileged information. In addition to selection and training, building and leveraging prior
coopetition experience depicts a critical management task (Gnyawali and Park 2011). Such
experience enables a frm to develop coopetition capabilities in order to create value and
capture a greater share from the created value. For example, Samsung has a long track record
in partnering with rivals, and they leveraged this experience in their transition from a frm
producing key parts such as semiconductors to a major manufacturer of consumer electronics. To be able to learn from a coopetition alliance, learning begins at the top. Senior
management must be committed to enhancing their companies’ skills as well as avoiding
fnancial risk. But most learning takes place at the lower levels of an alliance. Employees not
only represent the front lines in an effective defence but also play a critical role in acquiring knowledge. They must be instructed on the partner’s strengths and weaknesses and
understand how acquiring particular skills will reinforce their frm’s competitive position.
A coopetition capability also enhances a frm’s ability to decide how and when to communicate coopetition ventures to internal and external stakeholders as well as a frm’s ability
to assess and appropriate external knowledge.
Taken together, in light of the potential synergies and challenges, partner frms may deploy
a wide range of organizational and alliance-based governance mechanisms to curb the negative repercussions of working together with a competitor. However, instead of adopting all
possible measures, partner frms should tailor governance to the specifc context. For example, providing access to one another’s markets demands different measures (i.e. exclusivity)
compared to when two rivals merge distribution channels (i.e. transfer pricing). In case
244
Coopetition alliances
multiple rivals are participating in an alliance (i.e. multi-lateral coopetition), the cooperation–
competition tension amplifes further, yet the mechanisms remain effective.Though, additional
attention has to be given to resource orchestration and safeguarding rewards for individual
participants (Geurts et al. 2022). If measures are not tailored to alliance objective and context,
the coordination costs are likely to outweigh the benefts.To enable effective management, it
is thus critical to capture experiences, develop best practices and share success stories.

Coopetition alliances: decision-making steps
Once competitors decide to forge a coopetition alliance, establishing an infrastructure that
promotes cooperative behaviour and mitigates the threat of unwarranted competitive acts
is the foremost critical activity. That is, alliance launch, management and evaluation deserve
managerial attention as well once the alliance becomes operational. If alliance objectives
incorporate learning and innovation, the learning alliance guidelines are informative as well,
and we suggest reading Chapter 11. Next, we present several managerial guidelines, in addition to generic guidelines, that enable alliance managers to turn potentially unstable coopetition alliances into viable and stable ones. To this end, we use our alliance development
framework (see Figure 16.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the strategic analysis, frms decide whether an alliance is an appropriate governance
mode for realizing their objectives. Taking a coopetition lens, the objective is to obtain or
access competitors’ resources, which, combined with the frm’s resource endowment, generate value beyond what would have been possible individually. A market exchange is a less
likely alternative as this would suggest that the desired resources have been commoditized and
are available to all industry incumbents. A merger or acquisition could be a viable alternative if the acquirer’s and target’s resources combined create a superior competitive position,
without (too many) issues of resource indivisibility and divestments. But in most instances, a
coopetition alliance could become the preferred governance mode, specifcally if the alliance
provides access to critical resources while offering a frm suffcient fexibility. For example,
in the airline industry, companies forge alliance relationships with competitors to strengthen
their hub and spokes systems (i.e. destinations), engage in code-sharing and other activities to
achieve economies of scale and scope. But if potential synergies extend beyond a threshold
and shareholders impose pressure on boards, mergers and acquisitions become a viable alternative to partnering.
If the decision is made to establish a partnership with a rival frm, it is important that
top management initiates an internal assessment of the organization. During their strategic
analysis, therefore, frms must assess their vulnerability by identifying potential sources for
conficts. For example, if a large ICT frm sells integrated solutions directly to their customers
but also decides to forge a coopetition alliance to offer their ICT solutions indirectly through
its rival partners, it becomes important that the organization structure is adapted to accommodate this situation. Without a Chinese wall, for example, customers and the rival partner
may question this frm’s integrity.Thus, coopetition alliances may warrant that a frm adapts
the internal organization structure and management practices to avoid a destabilizing impact
on the alliances.

Coopetition alliances
245
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
A coopetition alliance is preferred when a firm lacks the capacity to
develop resources internally and a merger/acquisition is too costly.
Assess internal organization to identify vulnerabilities and prepare
(and implement) pre-emptive changes in structure and management.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend partner selection criteria with partner’s competitive intent,
alliance reputation and existing (coopetition) alliances.
Conduct competitive benchmark analysis and assess the synergies and
risks associated with combining resource endowments.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Counteract the inclination to use distributive negotiation strategies;
promote openness, transparency, creativity and integrative solutions.
Negotiation agenda comprises topics such as non-competing,
exclusivity and use/ownership of (future) intellectual property.

4
Alliance
design
An effective design specifies the short- and long-term incentives for
rival partners to continue a coopetition alliance.
Avoid equity-based arrangement; if possible, opt for non-equity form
with a contract to avoid coordination costs and enhance flexibility.

5
Alliance
launch
Augment launch strategy with initiatives to overcome natural hostile
dispositions among alliance staff and other stakeholders.
Organize kick-off meetings across hierarchical levels, promote
exemplary behaviours and communicate the reasons for coopetition.

6
Alliance
management
Apply generic and, if applicable, learning management practices to
coordinate day-to-day operations of a coopetition alliance.
Pay specific attention to competitive tensions as minor incidents can
quickly escalate to major adversities.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with metrics capturing
cooperative and competitive processes and outcomes.
Gather and analyze external information about environment
dynamics, industry developments and competitors’ moves.

8
Alliance
termination
Assess the impact that terminating or withdrawing from a coopetition
alliance would have on the organization.
Exiting should be communicated to industry incumbents; signal
reliability and a readiness for future coopetition ventures.

FIGURE 16.1
Alliance development framework: coopetition alliances
Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection phase, a frm selects the partner(s) with which it can forge
a coopetition alliance. A thorough analysis of partner ft and resource complementarity is
critical for multiple reasons.With regard to partner ft, if rivals are of similar size and operate in the same markets, the inner workings are more likely to mimic one another, reducing
concerns about organizational, cultural, human and operational ft. If misft occurs, generic
guidelines should be suffcient to overcome the consequences of misft. However, frms must
246
Coopetition alliances
be aware that increasing levels of partner ft also increase the need for protective measures
because high ft facilitates competitive benchmarking and inter-organizational learning. In
addition, despite high levels of partner ft, coopetition alliances have failed because partners
have neither shared information nor allocated their best people and have given low priority
to sustaining the relationship. In other words, strategic ft—partner’s compatibility in strategic
vision and direction—is essential to build successful coopetition alliances. A comprehensive
understanding (and in later stages even an agreement) about how and to what extent the
coopetition alliance may strengthen the partner’s resource and competitive positions is an
important partner selection criterion. A frm should not select and forge an alliance with a
rival frm who benefts more (strategically) from the alliance than the frm itself.
In addition to a ft analysis, a frm should conduct an analysis of resource complementarity. Often alliance partners claim that the motive for the coopetition alliance originates in
the combination of their resource endowments; which may pertain for example to R&D
facilities, manufacturing, distribution channels and brands. Despite these synergetic motives,
resource complementarity also imposes risks on partners, specifcally in coopetition alliances. The extent to which resources overlap may offer economies of scale but also may
increase the likelihood of unwanted spillovers. Resource combinations may enable partners
to obtain dominant market positions, but unexpected legal consequences may unfold (see
Box 16.1).The extent to which frms’ resource endowments are complementary is indicative of their relative dependence on one another. Because partners have a common longterm goal and want to make the relationship work to achieve it, they accept an increasing
level of interdependence. However, as dependence is the inverse of power, specifc attention
should be given during partner selection to interdependency asymmetry, particularly if a
potential rival partner is part of a larger strategic group. In such groups, mutual forbearance is the guiding rule, which implies that members forsake competition and may target
non-members jointly. Concerns about these adversities tend to be mitigated if rival partners
have successfully collaborated before or build a reputation as a preferred and reliable alliance partner.

BOX 16.1 COMPETITION LAW1
Most markets in the free world are regulated to ensure undistorted competition and to
prevent the abuse of a dominant market position. Concentrations of undertakings—
including alliance arrangements—that meet certain turnover thresholds must be
appraised beforehand by the authorities because such concentrations diminish competition and can lead to a dominant market position. In the Netherlands, the Competitive
Trading Act (Mededingingswet) applies; in the EU, both the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the Merger Regulation 39/2004/EC set competition
rules; while in the US, the Sherman Antitrust Act must be adhered to. Particularly,
if alliance partners consider adopting an equity-based arrangement to govern their
alliance, the arrangement may be subject to this type of merger control. Equity alliances may allow companies to spread and diversify risks and bring together sufcient
equity for projects that require high investment. Equity alliances usually have a more
permanent efect on competition and are scrutinized beforehand by way of merger
Coopetition alliances
247
control. For that purpose, intended equity alliances with a potentially profound efect
on competition must be notifed to the competent authorities and may not be carried
out without prior approval. Examination of the intended concentration focuses on the
need to maintain sufcient competition in the relevant market and to prevent disadvantages for customers. If the concentration signifcantly impedes competition, this may
be remedied, for instance, by selling one or more business units or by ensuring that
services or supplies will remain available to competitors. Non-equity alliance arrangements are not subject to merger control. Nevertheless, competition law dictates these
alliances may not distort competition otherwise and must comply with the prohibition
of cartels. Non-equity alliances may for instance be formed to facilitate costly research
and development. Especially if the market fails to provide for such R&D by individual
companies and the consumer ultimately benefts from combined R&D, such an alliance may be in compliance with competition law. For both equity and non-equity
arrangements, partner frms need to monitor growth and assess changes in market position and corporate governance to ensure continued compliance with competition law.
A successful alliance may obtain a dominant market position in which case its actions
are monitored closely by authorities to prevent the abuse of such dominance, e.g. by
predatory pricing. When establishing an alliance, competition law must thus be taken
into consideration. If merger control is undesirable, a non-equity alliance is recommendable, while an equity-based alliance will need to ensure it stays below the relevant
thresholds to rule out merger control. If merger control is unavoidable, parties will
need to enter into a comprehensive letter of intent that sets out their desired cooperation in order to allow the authorities to perform a detailed appraisal. Failure to comply
with competition law can result in hefty fnes in order to deter undertakings from
non-compliance. Violations of competition law cannot be undone, so it pays to engage
legal advice at an early stage to prevent unnecessary risks when structuring the alliance.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
The alliance negotiation stage involves partners in achieving agreement on the alliance
objectives, scope and governance; if they achieve consensus, the outcomes are formalized in
the alliance contract. Akin to other alliance types, a mixture of integrative and distributive
most likely results in favourable negotiation process and outcomes. Appointing savvy negotiators is, however, critical because competitors tend to prefer to use distributive negotiation
strategies as such an approach enables them to protect their stakes and interests. Actively
using integrative negotiation strategies to promote openness, transparency and creativity is
thus critical to overcome this disposition and to achieve integrative solutions that extend
above and beyond individual interests. With regard to the outcomes of the negotiations,
coopetition alliances may demand specifc governance and contractual mechanism to invoke
cooperative behaviour. Setting the negotiation agenda frst is therefore a critical task. Before
the negotiations begin, partners thus need to prioritize topics; identify communalities, differences and specifc risks; and explicate the objectives of the coopetition alliances. For example,
it is important that negotiators on both sides of the table have insight in the areas where the
partners are competing, including products, services, markets and technology. Negotiation
248
Coopetition alliances
topics may then refer to scope, non-competing, exclusivity and use/ownership of (future)
intellectual property. Also negotiators must achieve agreement on how to deal with each
other’s clients, specifcally if the collaboration extends beyond pre-competitive R&D.That is,
to what extent are customer contact details exchanged, who is allowed to approach customers and is the market divided between the competitors? During this stage it also becomes
critical to assess whether the coopetition alliance (with regard to objectives, scope and governance form) infringes on antitrust laws and regulations. If so, the initial agreement may
need to be renegotiated.

Step 4: alliance design
An alliance design specifes the nature and scope of the alliance, shapes the breadth and depth
of the interaction between the two frms and outlines the short- and long-term incentives
for the rival partner to continue the relationship. Decisions about the formal governance
should aim to enhance cooperative behaviours by directly developing linkages and shared
modes of operating. The decision regarding governance form is likely to indicate some
preference for an equity-based arrangement because such arrangements stimulate long-term
collaboration but still safeguard against opportunistic acts. However, a relatively small company should perhaps avoid an equity-based arrangement, such as a joint venture, with large
and established competitors because whereas the smaller party puts its core business into the
venture, the alliance may be only a short-term distraction and learning opportunity for the
larger partner. Equity-based arrangements may also increase coordination costs and promote
rigidity, which may render a coopetition alliance ineffcient. Also equity-arrangements may
violate anti-trust laws, or at least draw governmental attention. Non-equity arrangements
offer more fexibility, and via tailored alliance contracts, similar degrees of protection may
be achieved.
Because the alliance design functions as a frst critical deterrent against unwanted competitive behaviours, the contract should incorporate hybrid compensation schemes to
provide suffcient incentives to the partner frms. It should also specify how the alliance
relationship is protected from external competitive acts (in other markets) that may be continued even if the alliance becomes operational. In addition, partners may formally agree
to reduce the scope of the alliance relationship to circumscribe a partner’s opportunities
to learn.That is, partners must identify the activities in which the alliance may engage and
set boundaries of the alliance, to include or exclude specifc geographical markets, product categories, customer segments, brands, technologies and fxed assets. Such restrictions
limit the likelihood of competitive and opportunistic behaviours.The partners should also
defne responsibilities clearly and agree on an effective dispute-resolution mechanism so
that the frst problem to emerge will not sour the atmosphere and lead to a decline in
trust. Effective communication systems should be installed between many people at many
organizational levels. They do not abuse the information they gain. They are fexible, and
they respect each other.They show mutual integrity and act in honourable ways that justify, enhance and sustain mutual trust and commitment. In addition to governance form
and contractual decisions, during the design stage partners may erect other mechanisms.
Within their organizations, partners may award the relationship with a formal status and
organized responsibilities such that conficts are less likely to emerge and, if they do, are
quickly resolved.

Coopetition alliances
249
Step 5: alliance launch
During the alliance launch stage, the partner frms transition from negotiation and design to
preparing and implementing the alliance contract. Systemically organizing the alliance execution is critical with regard to a coopetition alliance as employees may have a naturally hostile
disposition towards the rival partner. Specifcally, the partner has been portrayed as an enemy,
and suddenly it is expected that staff will collaborate. As part of the alliance launch strategy,
internal communication thus becomes very important. Partners should inform employees at
all levels about the motives for the alliance relationship. As part of operational plans, communication should not only focus on informing involved staff about motives for the coopetition alliances but also on what skills and technologies are off-limits to the partner, and how
to monitor what the partner requests and receives. To overcome the ‘we-versus-us’ schism,
kick-off meetings are critical at and across hierarchical levels. If applicable, before executing
the alliance, check whether governmental approval has been given to avoid post hoc sanctions
and penalties.

Step 6: alliance management
Within the setting of a coopetition alliance, the alliance management stage initiates dayto-day operations that enable partners to leverage the foundation that has been laid by the
alliance negotiation and launch teams. It is imperative that management continues to invest
in the quality of the working relationship. Trust building and learning about one another
is critical to overcome natural inclinations to resort to a competitive logic. Also, ongoing
monitoring of alliance progress and assessment of whether partners comply with agreed-upon
stipulations is critical. For example, early detection of unwanted (and perhaps unintended)
knowledge exchange enables alliance management to take necessary precautions. Also, swift
confict resolution is imperative in coopetition alliances. Due to the competitive nature, conficts are likely to emerge—if not caused by internal actions, external competitor moves may
cause conficts—and without adequate resolutions, conficts may spread through the alliance,
destabilizing the relationship. In short, the main task of alliance management is to create a
climate in which knowledge can be exchanged, while simultaneously securing the protection
of knowledge not part of the alliance agreement.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
This stage requires a performance metric system that accounts for the idiosyncrasies tied to
a coopetition alliance (see Rai 2016 for a measure of value creation in coopetition alliances).
In addition to generic metrics, the system may comprise metrics capturing cooperative and
competitive processes and outcomes with regard to the alliance and the individual partner
organizations. Alliance-level metrics entail (generic) relational metrics with a focus on harmony, conficts and commitment but also metrics that capture unwanted spillovers, knowledge leakage and other competitive acts. Within the partner organizations, metrics may be
deployed to capture the functioning of gatekeepers, the effectiveness of a Chinese wall and
other aspects of organizational alignment. External monitoring is also critical as, for example,
an unexpected move by an outside competitor or the entry of a new competitor may render
a coopetition alliance obsolete (or demand radical structural adaptations). This implies that
250
Coopetition alliances
the performance metric system should account for environmental and industry dynamics.
In addition, as the alliance grows (and outperforms other rivals), anti-trust laws may become
salient, particularly if the partner frms together obtain a dominant market position.The performance system should be able to identify such hazards promptly.

Step 8: alliance termination
If partners have reached this stage, it means that they have decided to dissolve the alliance.
Depending on contractual agreements, each frm must secure its presents and future interests.
Depending on the scope of the alliance, a termination plan may also involve procedures and
guidelines for disintegration. For example, withdrawal from a pre-competitive R&D alliance
is usually easier than pulling out of a multi-objective coopetition alliance. In both instances,
however, alliance partners should seek to recoup critical resources and knowledge, as neither
partner wants to provide its rival with a (free) advantage. Communication strategies must
also be developed because termination of the alliance or the departure of one partner may
have serious repercussions for the other partners. Operating in similar industries and markets,
future alliance opportunities depend on the partners’ reputations; hence, making a constructive exit is the preferred option.

Summary
Coopetition refers to a collaboration between competitors and thus depicts a paradoxical
relationship that emerges when two or more frms cooperate in some activities and, at the
same time, compete with each other in other activities. In coopetition alliances, learning from
rival partners is paramount, and successful companies view such arrangements as a window
to explore and capture their partners’ capabilities.They use the alliance to build skills in areas
outside the formal agreement and systematically diffuse new knowledge throughout their
organizations. However, effective coopetition alliances also offer safeguards, organization- and
alliance-based, against unwillingly transferring competitive advantages to ambitious partners.
Taken together, though coopetition alliances are inherently tied to risk and uncertainty, in
the contemporary competitive landscape they are of critical importance to frms to maintain
their competitive edge.

CASE: RECKITT BENCKISER2
Reckitt Benckiser Group (RB) is a British multinational consumer goods company headquartered in Slough, England. It is a producer of health, hygiene and home products. It was
formed in 1999 by the merger of the UK-based Reckitt & Colman plc and the Netherlandsbased Benckiser NV. RB’s brands are segmented into Health, Hygiene and Home brands.
Examples are Neurofen, Strepsils, Gaviscon and Durex (Health); Finish, Dettol, Lysol, Veet,
Harpic and Cillit Bang (Hygiene); Vanish, Woolite, Calgon and Airwick (Home). RB has operations in around 60 countries, and its products are sold in almost 200 countries. RB is the
global market leader in automatic dishwashing detergents through the brand Finish.
One of the most time-consuming household chores is washing dirty dishes by hand.
To make this process more convenient, the appliance industry introduced automatic
Coopetition alliances
251
dishwashers in the 1960s. Instead of washing dirty dishes by hand, consumers could now
put them in the dishwasher, add chemical products (dishwashing detergent, rinse aid and
salt) and the machine would clean and dry the dishes. Furthermore, a dishwasher consumes less water and energy than hand-washing. However, the household adaption of automatic dishwashers was signifcantly slower than the household adaption rate of washing
machines. Even today, only two out of ten households globally wash dishes in a dishwasher.
Consequently, RB decided to form ‘Automatic Dishwashing Market Creation Alliances’
with leading automatic dishwasher manufacturers in order to set up consumer education
marketing programmes. The objective of those programmes was to make consumers aware
of the automatic dishwasher category and to create the desirability of purchasing an automatic dishwasher. The content of the marketing programmes was intended to communicate the emotional and rational benefts of automatic dishwashing compared to manual
dishwashing, such as more time for yourself and your family, better cleaning results and less
water and energy use. The programmes started in Western Europe in the 1970s and were
then extended in the next decades to Southern Europe, Eastern Europe, Turkey, Russia, Middle East, South Africa, Brazil, China and other developing markets.
RB initially collaborated with two rival manufacturers: BSH and Electrolux. As the programmes expanded geographically, the number of participating rival manufacturers
increased, and companies like Arcelik, Whirlpool, LG, Haier and Samsung joined the market
creation programmes as well. The alliance partner selection criteria were based on strategic
and cultural ft; for example, the strategic intention of the partners to invest in creating the
automatic dishwasher category and the capability of the partners to work together in a
strategic alliance.
Consider the alliance between Finish and Bosch (BSH Group). In 2010, in an attempt to
vitalize the dishwasher market in Singapore, Finish and Bosch launched an island-wide marketing campaign. The campaign communicated to consumers about the benefts of washing dishes in a dishwasher compared to washing dishes by hand and a call to action to buy
a dishwasher for a special introductory price with free delivery and installation, and with a
month’s supply of the detergent Finish. In the words of Mr Cheok Kian Sheong, strategic
alliances manager at RB,
Bosch is our global partner in creating awareness on the benefts of dishwasher use.
We are very excited to be able to bring this concept to Asia and to Singapore, and as
Bosch is the market leader of dishwashers in Singapore, we are confdent that once
consumers experience the benefts of the dishwasher, they will soon be telling their
family and friends about it.
In the beginning, the programmes were managed on a country-by-country basis. With
the globalization of the programmes, however, a central alliance group was introduced
to coordinate the overall programme. The coordination consists of strategy and marketing
plan alignment with the global Finish marketing team and the global marketing teams of
the partners, and the execution of the programmes with the country teams of RB and the
partners.
Each market creation alliance with a dishwasher manufacturer is managed by Finish on
an individual and bilateral basis, without direct interaction between the different (rival)
machine manufacturer partners. Thus, Finish aligns the overall programme objectives and
252
Coopetition alliances
manages the execution with competing dishwasher manufacturers. In this context, the key
is to set up clear rules; for example, the market creation programmes in each country are
carried out sequentially with the partners. An important lesson is that early planning of the
entire marketing plan is very important to avoid overlap of programmes.
The ‘Automatic Dishwashing Market Creation Alliances’ approach has been very successful as a clear positive correlation can be shown between investments in the joint marketing
programmes and an accelerated household adaption rate to automatic dishwashers. The
programmes has expanded to more countries in developing markets. In 2019, Finish and
Bosch partnered to launch dishwashing products in the Indian market using the ‘#NoMoreDishStress’ campaign.

Questions
1
2
3
Explain why the household adaption rate of washing machines was faster than the
household adaption rate of automatic dishwashers.
Explain why the described alliances can be termed ‘star-type alliances’. Consider that
the participating competitor dishwasher manufacturers are not directly engaged in a
cooperative arrangement.
Explain where you see the main challenges in the execution of the described market
creation alliances.

Notes
1 Text by Henk Raven, Habraken Rutten Advocaten.
2 Interview with a senior executive of Reckitt Benckiser.

17
MULTI-PARTNER ALLIANCES
Multi-partner alliances (or multi-lateral alliances) are partnerships formed by more than
two parties. A multi-partner alliance enables frms to align multiple sets of complementary
resources, often with the aim of creating additional synergies or complying with increasing
customer demands. Examples of multi-partner alliances can be found in a variety of industries,
from the semiconductor and airline industries to agri-food industries. If properly managed,
a multi-partner alliance strategy can be a win–win situation for all parties involved. However, whereas dealing with adversity is relatively straightforward in an alliance with only two
partners, governance within a multi-partner alliance becomes more complex as the one-toone relationship is replaced by a one-to-many relationship.The increasing number of parties
presents the managers involved with a particular challenge. In order to capture the potential
synergies that come with a multi-partner alliance, these managers must prevent and control
free-riding behaviour by their counterparts.The opening sections of this chapter explore this
multi-partner alliance challenge and elaborate on the mechanisms that managers can use to
deal with it.The alliance development framework is used in the following section to present
specifc managerial guidelines for multi-partner alliances.The chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The multi-partner alliance challenge
A multi-partner alliance is defned as a collective, voluntary organizational arrangement
between more than two parties, with common objectives, joint decision-making and shared
risks.These parties engage interactively in multi-lateral activities, such as collaborative research,
development, sourcing, production, marketing and commercialization of technologies, products and/or services (Lavie et al. 2007; Rochemont 2010). Multi-partner alliances are typical
in areas such as the airline industry.Through code-sharing, joint network coverage and joint
marketing initiatives (such as frequent fyer programmes), airlines are able to increase their utilization rates and offer an increased number of destinations.Although a multi-partner alliance
can be organized through an alliance contract, parties often establish a separate organizational
structure in which the alliance activities are executed. Such entities are usually non-proftoriented, and participating frms pay a cost-covering fee.The main advantage of this arrangement
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-17
254 Multi-partner alliances
is that it allows the partnership to enlarge easily if other parties are interested in joining.
A consortium is another specifc type of multi-partner alliance in which multiple parties
collaborate to achieve a common goal, often related to research and development, economies
of scale and setting industry standards. See Table 17.1 for examples of multi-partner alliances.
Similar to the motives behind bilateral alliances, frms form multi-partner alliances to access
and complement each other’s resources (García-Canal et al. 2003). By sharing resources across
multiple partners, participants are better able to use their resources and improve their ability
to serve a larger part of the value chain. For example, partners within co-development multipartner alliances exchange knowledge to develop new products and/or services, thereby increasing customer value and competitive advantage. Sharing research and development activities also
enables partners to divide investments over a larger number of participants and to realize economies of scale. In addition, shared procurement with multiple partners provides an opportunity
to bundle volume, which translates into increased bargaining power and, consequently, lower
purchase prices. Multi-partner alliances also offer opportunities in terms of network connections
as participating parties join a network that becomes a repository of resources and information
about the availability and reliability of prospective partners. Multi-partner alliances are sometimes forged to enable collective lobbying to guard the interests of multiple frms or even entire
industries. Through a multi-partner lobbying alliance, frms can infuence political decision
making that affects a group of frms or entire industries. Multi-partner alliances also arise when
industry standards are to be set. Setting an industry standard often involves substantial investments and is beyond the ability of a single frm. By participating in a multi-partner alliance, frms
reduce individual costs and risks, while increasing the chance of successful market introductions.
TABLE 17.1 Examples of multi-partner alliances
Description
Sematech
SEMATECH (Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology) is a consortium
of American semiconductor manufacturers which was founded in 1987.The
motivation for establishing the alliance was the loss of American market share
due to increased competition among Japanese manufacturers. Between 1987
and 1992, SEMATECH generated 15 patents and 36 patent applications,
helped enact more than 300 industry standards, participated in 110 equipment
improvement projects and joint development programmes and published more
than 1,100 technical documents. In 1993,American semiconductor producers
recaptured the top position in worldwide sales with 45.3% of the chip market.

Deutscher Robotik
Association
In 2020, the Deutscher Robotik Verband was founded in Nuremberg.The aim
of the robotics association is to promote the use of robot technology, especially
in small and medium sized enterprises. Manufacturers and users are expressly
encouraged to become members in order to make experience from the
operator’s point of view usable within the network.

DiTek cluster
DiTek is known as the Lithuania’s Artifcial Intelligence Technology Cluster.
It was created to boost the market position of its members by exploiting their
collective AI knowledge base and skill sets.The cluster aims for value-added
by developing new AI-based products and services or improving existing
ones.The dual use and defence sectors represent some 60% of its members’
activities, which range across electronics, energy, ICT and robotics.

Sources: Browning et al. (1995); Ditek Cluster (2017); German Robotic Association (2020).

Multi-partner alliances
255
Despite the potential advantages of multi-partner alliances, they are inherently more complex to manage than two-party alliances. A growing number of partners increases the risk of
opportunistic behaviour because the number of dyadic relationships increases geometrically
as the number of partners becomes larger (García-Canal et al. 2003). One critical hazard concerns the danger of free-riding behaviour by partner frms, whereby a member of a group
obtains benefts from group membership but does not bear a proportional share of the costs
(Albanese and Van Fleet 1985). A multi-partner alliance may generate ‘collective’ or ‘public’
goods, such as knowledge, that are accessible to all partners involved, even when they fail
to fulfl their resource contributions and other obligations (Dyer and Nobeoka 2000). For
example, a partner frm may willingly participate in knowledge-sharing activities to acquire
knowledge and then exit the multi-partner alliance or refuse to contribute its own knowledge.The multi-partner setting reduces the guilt that a partner feels towards its counterparts
when it chooses not to cooperate.This causes the risk of internal competition and conficts
between partners to increase due to diverging interests and the possibility of unsanctioned
free riding (Zeng and Chen 2003).
To deal effectively with free riding, multi-partner alliances need specifc governance mechanisms that pertain to areas such as coordination, communication and incentives schemes.
Partners must strike the right balance between under-investing and over-investing in multipartner alliances.Whereas some frms seek to free ride on their partners’ investments, others
end up subsidizing their partners and fail to earn an appropriate return on their investments.
It is also important to identify the right time to exit a multi-partner alliance given that, unlike
one-to-one alliances, a multi-partner alliance can maintain its operations even after certain
members have left. Therefore, alliance managers must invest in the partnership to increase
the probability of value creation, while also preventing and controlling free riding by their
counterparts to avoid asymmetrical contributions and appropriation.

Managing multi-partner alliances
The main motivation behind multi-partner alliances is to capitalize on resources supplied by
multiple partners, with the aim of achieving synergies that can only be realized with multiple
partners. Simultaneously, however, partners must eliminate the risk of free riding preemptively
and, if necessary, resolve (for example, through sanctions) the adverse impact of this behaviour. There are fve mechanisms by which participants can achieve this two-fold objective:
(1) resource complementarity, (2) task organization, (3) contractual governance, (4) relational
governance and (5) orchestrator role (see Table 17.2).

Resource complementarity
The precise amount of resources that each alliance partner contributes to a multi-partner alliance depends on the competences of each partner. Preferably, each partner would contribute
resources to the multi-partner alliance that their counterparts cannot provide. Partners ideally
bring something unique and non-redundant to the alliance so that the overall resource base of
the alliance becomes stronger. At the same time, the fact that partners depend on each other
helps prevent internal competition (Hill and Hellriegel 1994). For example, whereas one partner may provide a fnancial contribution, its counterparts may supply non-fnancial resources,
such as specifc material assets or tacit capabilities, deployment of personnel, machines or
256
Multi-partner alliances
TABLE 17.2 Managing multi-partner alliances
Description
Implications
Resource
complementarity
Multiple partners contribute
resources to the purpose of
generating synergy.

Unique resource contributions
reduce the risk of free riding,
whereas overlapping resource
contributions encourage free riding.

Task organization
Multiple partners make it more
diffcult to distinguish between
individual tasks and outcomes.

Designating identifable, unique and
transparent tasks to partners reduces
the risk of free riding.

Contractual
governance
Multi-partner alliances tend to be
organized through a non-equitybased arrangement, implying
a need for clear contractual
specifcations.

Developing a transparent incentive
system, demanding an entrance fee
and installing a clear decision-making
and monitoring structure reduce the
risk of free riding.

Relational
governance
Multi-partner alliances demand
high-quality relational governance.

Investing in relational norms to guide
collaborative behaviour is imperative.

Orchestrator role
An orchestrator is responsible for
the proactive management of a
multi-partner alliance.

Orchestrators create stability, align
interests, encourage communication
and execute brand management.

production facilities and technical skills. In addition, when each party provides a unique
contribution, any failure to fulfl obligations is quickly noticed and subject to immediate
sanctioning. Unique contributions also reduce the risk of surplus and wasteful resources. In
contrast, the presence of resource substitutes within a multi-partner alliance may cause tension. Resource substitution undermines power relations because partners that provide similar
resources may lose their justifcation for being a member of the alliance. Consequently, a frm
may either increase its resource contribution to signal its commitment or economize on its
resource contribution and engage in free-riding behaviour. However, alliance continuity is
not necessarily jeopardized as resource contributions made by free-riding partners are substituted by the resource contributions of other partners. Nonetheless, if management does
not effectively control free-riding behaviour, free-riding partners will illegitimately reap the
benefts of a multi-partner alliance.Therefore, a successful multi-partner alliance is dependent
on having a precise mix of partners with resources that are complementary to one another
and required to realize alliance objectives.

Task organization
Increased group size reduces the perceptibility of individual contributions and tasks, which
makes it more diffcult to distinguish free-riding partners (Albanese and Van Fleet 1985).
Therefore, it is important to translate a multi-partner alliance strategy into identifable, unique
and transparent tasks in order to prevent free riding in multi-partner alliances. Identifable
tasks are those in which the output of the specifc tasks can be identifed and tied to a specifc
partner. According to Davis (2016), one effective way to organize complex tasks (i.e. innovation) is to decompose activities in a series of interlinked tasks between multiple subsets of
Multi-partner alliances
257
partners, overseen by a third party. By temporarily restricting participation to subsets, multipartner alliance managers can optimize local output and in turn choose how local output is
incorporated in the broader whole.
A lack of clear task defnitions results in weak contracts, which allows partners to make use of
ambiguity about duties and responsibilities and behave in an opportunistic manner. However, as
the number of partners increases, identifying and allocating specifc tasks for each member may
become more hazardous, and tasks may overlap across partners.The more partners involved in
an alliance, the more diffcult it is to formulate a specifc role for each alliance partner.The risk
of free riding increases if similar tasks are delegated to more than one partner as the failure of
one partner to execute a task is most likely to remain unnoticed. Moreover, this partner can still
enjoy the benefts because other parties may have completed similar tasks. Free riding may also
result from a lack of transparency in the objectives and related tasks.When tasks are not made
transparent, it is diffcult to monitor progress, which increases the opportunity for partners to
exploit this ambiguity. Designating identifable, unique and transparent tasks in a multi-partner
alliance prevents free riding, reduces conficts and stimulates collective value creation.

Contractual governance
Owing to the larger number of parties involved, multi-partner alliances are often organized
through non-equity-based arrangements.To reduce the likelihood of premature dissolution,
homogeneity in governance forms between partners in a multi-partner alliance is preferable over heterogeneity in governance forms (Heidl et al. 2014). However, if the number of
partners increases, supplemental governance in the form of contractual provisions and management control is required (García-Canal et al. 2003). An effective and formalized incentive
system can prompt parties in a multi-partner alliance to act in the interests of the collaborative arrangement (Zeng and Chen 2003). Since free-riding behaviour is essentially a result of
an individual’s unfavourable comparisons of benefts to costs, one major way of reducing or
preventing free riding is either to improve a party’s perceptions of its pay-off by increasing its
share of benefts of public goods or to decrease its costs. For example, special incentives can
be offered to encourage the provision of public goods. Extrinsic incentives include additional
compensation, extra time off, assignment to preferred projects, extra released time, a larger
share in the public good and recognition from superiors or peers. Intrinsic incentives include
the sense of achievement or satisfaction that results from completing a diffcult or unique task.
Another way to build long-term commitment is to ask participating frms for an entrance
fee. High entrance fees represent incentives to solve any emerging adversities as participating
frms are locked into the partnership.
Effective monitoring of partner behaviour (contributions and compensation) is also vital
for effective management of multi-partner arrangements. These monitoring systems can act
as early warning systems since deviations are detected promptly and allow partners to impose
(economic) sanctions, such as penalties. Clarity in decision-making processes is also important in order to prevent opportunistic behaviour because a lack of clarity increases ambiguity
among parties and provides opportunities to pursue separate interests covertly (Rochemont
2010). Decision-making procedures, including majority voting, consensus, blocking votes and
lead partners, describe how decisions are made within the alliance. It should be clear who
has the authority to make decisions and what decision-making procedures are being used or
will be implemented. Without a clear decision-making structure, partners may feel isolated
or ignored and may start to question whether their infuence is suffcient to achieve the
258
Multi-partner alliances
alliance’s objectives. Financial investments may also function as a signal of commitment. In
the SEMATECH alliance, for example, companies were obliged not only to contribute R&D
knowledge but also to bring fnancial resources.These fnancial resources were necessary to
develop an industry standard successfully, but they also had the effect of locking in the members of the network, which can act as glue for the cooperation (Hwang and Burgers 1997).
Preferably, agreements about these and other governance mechanisms should be embodied
in an alliance contract.

Relational governance
A multi-partner alliance demands strong relational governance. It is impossible to safeguard
every action through formal contracts, and a strong collaborative climate represents a powerful tool for managing the free-riding problem. Relational norms comprise unwritten rules
that depict how parties collaborate with each other and pertain to fexibility, solidarity and
continuity expectations. Relational norms reduce self-interested behaviour and help parties
understand the congruency of individual goals more easily, thereby reducing the need to
resort to close formal monitoring. These norms also reduce uncertainty about potentially
destructive behaviours (such as free riding) and encourage partners to act in accordance with
alliance objectives. In the presence of such norms, the partnership will develop based on the
principles of solidarity and fair exchange, suggesting that all partners believe that the benefts
they receive from the relationship are equivalent to their contributions. Relational norms also
stimulate the building of a relational capital. Based on the belief that partners will be dealt
with in an equitable manner, even in ambiguous situations, relational capital will guide partners’ behaviour to trust one another. They will act for the best performance of the alliance,
which will lead to optimal contributions. When free-riding parties deviate from relational
norms, they can be forced to leave the alliance or change their behaviour. Socialization within
multi-partner alliances increases the likelihood of collective success.
Apart from formal sanctions, free-riding behaviour can be prevented by social sanctions or
the threat thereof (Albanese and Van Fleet 1985).This form of sanctioning does not involve
formal policies and procedures, management directives and controls; instead, it uses relational
and or behavioural persuasion to enforce the conduct of partners by the other partners. In a
multi-partner alliance, social sanctions are a powerful instrument with which to guide partner
behaviour since they can have signifcant implications for an individual partner, especially
in situations in which the partner is dependent on the multi-partner network. Collective
group sanctions may then be an effective measure for resolving conficts as they affect a frm’s
opportunities negatively over a longer period of time. Social sanctions become more effective
if the group size increases as the possible damage to a member’s reputation is greater if more
partners spread negative word of mouth.

The orchestrator role
Maintaining a group of partners can be diffcult due to the risk of conficting interests.This
requires active management.Whatever the governance structure, the group of frms must have
some way to coordinate actions.Without leadership, a multi-partner alliance cannot expect to
formulate and execute a consistent strategy (Bamford and Ernst 2003). In large multi-partner
alliances, this function can be performed by orchestrators (Rochemont 2010), an active network manager (Doz and Hamel 1998) or a strategic centre (Lorenzoni and Baden-Fuller
Multi-partner alliances
259
1995). Effective orchestrators foster group stability by minimizing internal competition
among member frms. Having a larger number of parties in an alliance implies diverging
interests, and a key task of an orchestrator is to align members’ interests and prevent free riding
by stressing the importance of collective objectives over individual objectives. In addition, the
orchestrator needs to proactively manage alliance entry and exit as alliance reconfguration
may destabilize the partnership, particularly if they are a member with a comparatively large
resource-based exit (Bakker 2016). Orchestrators also engage in brand management as many
multi-partner alliances create a unifed brand in order to increase the awareness of potential
consumers. An orchestrator can promote the network brand and ensure that all marketing
activities are consistent to create a uniform appearance.

Multi-partner alliances: decision-making steps
Value appropriation in multi-partner alliances must be considered jointly with the value-creating strategy because the quality of the collaboration and value-sharing rules both determine
how much value the partnership can create.Alignment of complementary resources may provide strong motivation to forge a multi-partner alliance, but the issue of value appropriation is
more salient owing to the higher governance costs caused by the risk of free riding. In order
to provide guidelines for establishing win–win multi-partner alliances, this section elaborates
on specifc decisions for multi-partner alliances at each stage of the alliance development
framework (see Figure 17.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
During the strategic analysis, frms decide whether a multi-partner alliance is an appropriate governance mode to realize their goals.Their focus at this stage should be to analyze the
benefts of a multi-partner alliance in comparison to alternative governance modes, including
autonomous growth, mergers and bilateral alliances. A multi-partner alliance is a preferred
governance mode when the type and magnitude of required resources extends beyond the
focal frm and an alliance with a single partner. Internalization would only be a preferred
alternative if a frm were able to integrate and exploit a variety of external resources effciently; yet most frms lack this ability. In addition, desired resources are often not readily
available in markets, making market exchange inappropriate. For example, developing an
industry standard requires substantial investments, involves high risks and depends on the participation and commitment of parties across the value chain. It is beyond the scope of one or
two frms to develop such a standard. In such circumstances, multi-partner alliance strategies
are appropriate because the probability of one frm’s success depends on the resource contributions of multiple parties, including suppliers, competitors and customers. Analysis should
focus on resource availability and the potential strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats
related to participation in a multi-partner alliance.

Step 2: alliance partner selection
During the partner selection stage, a frm either selects multiple partners to forge a multi-partner alliance or decides to participate in an existing multi-partner alliance.A key issue in both
situations is assessing partner ft as a misft may encourage free-riding behaviour. Furthermore,
it is important that partners have some degree of common objectives and shared visions on
260
Multi-partner alliances
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Extend governance mode selection criteria with the choice between
bilateral alliance and multi-partner alliance; a multi-partner alliance is
preferred when desired resources are scattered across multiple parties
and a firm lacks the ability to efficiently procure, either via
internalization or market exchange, and exploit these resources.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend generic partner fit criteria with partner’s resource
contributions, partner’s culture, partner’s ability to execute tasks,
financial commitment and alliance history.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Due to the increasing number of partners, multi-partner alliance
negotiations tend to be more complicated than bilateral alliances;
negotiations pertain to formation or to accepting a new partner.
Choose negotiators who possess excellent skills, understand the
firm’s negotiation bandwidth and focus on topics, including value
creation and appropriation, alliance scope and integration trajectory.

4
Alliance
design
Supplement a (preferred) non-equity arrangement with a transparent
compensation/incentive structure, a clear organization of tasks and a
comprehensible decision-making structure, and install an orchestrator.
Design should promote a working climate characterized by relational
norms and capital to encourage collaborative behaviour.

5
Alliance
launch
Organize kick-off meetings, across hierarchical level, including
partner working groups, to secure contribution and participation.
Find a balance between putting effort in coordination and
communication versus executing the activities and producing results.

6
Alliance
management
7
Alliance
evaluation
8
Alliance
termination
FIGURE 17.1
Invest in relational norms to enhance solidarity, flexibility and
continuity; relational capital encourages trustworthy behaviour.
Partners should be clear about when and how social sanctions are
imposed and, if necessary, enforce them to deter free-riding behaviour.
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing
individual task execution and performance, free-riding behaviour,
fairness of value distribution and realization of short - and long-term
objectives among partners.
Specify exit provisions: how and when a partner may leave or can be
forced to exit a multi-partner alliance.
Develop termination plan that contain guidelines on disintegration
trajectories and communications strategies to limit adverse
implications.

Alliance development framework: multi-partner alliances
industry development; otherwise, the multi-partner alliance is likely to collapse. Next, attention should be given to resource complementarities. In a multi-partner setting, partners prefer
to contribute varying resources as the level of resource uniqueness is inversely correlated with
free-riding behaviour. In other words, resource substitution should be minimized as overlap
tends to lead to free-riding behaviour and dysfunctional conficts. If overlap is inevitable,
analysis of the partner frms’ market positions could reveal that they serve different markets,
which reduces the risk that the overlap will actually translate to dysfunctional conficts or
competition. Cultural ft between partners stimulates a collaborative culture, whereas misft
Multi-partner alliances
261
prompts a competitive culture that fuels the chance of free riding.Therefore, a cultural assessment of the potential partners is required. Another important selection criterion relates to a
party’s willingness to pay an entrance fee. By complying with this requirement, new partners
express commitment by providing a certain contribution to a collaborative platform.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
Negotiations in multi-partner alliances tend to be more complicated than in bilateral alliance
negotiations. Because more parties are involved within the alliance, it can be more diffcult
to develop a collective value creation strategy and agree on the fair distribution of benefts.
To this end, the role of an orchestrator becomes important. By demonstrating leadership, an
orchestrator is able to infuence partners positively and in a functional manner by providing a
clear and enthusiastic vision, emphasizing the importance of the collective over the pursuit of
individual interests. In addition to these qualities, the role of the orchestrator is critical in two
separate negotiation situations that are typical for multi-partner alliances. If the multi-partner
alliance is newly established, negotiating partners may beneft from appointing an orchestrator
directly (or a group of people fulflling an orchestrator’s role).An orchestrator’s task is to introduce the parties involved, disentangle private interests, create a shared understanding of the
alliance’s objectives and individual roles and responsibilities, and create common ground from
which to launch the partnership. If the alliance has been operating for a while, the orchestrator represents the collective and is tasked with negotiating with any new partners and initially
ascertaining the desirability of the new partner (for example, identifying the unique contribution the partner will make to realize the collective objectives). In addition, because accepting
a new partner involves enlarging the group, negotiation topics and approaches may differ
from the former situation. For example, negotiations may split in several phases, enabling a
new partner to integrate slowly. In this way, a new partner can be brought up to standard; this
prevents disturbances in the existing alliance, and existing partners postpone a defnitive entry
decision until the fnal negotiations.

Step 4: alliance design
The focus during the alliance design stage should be on installing governance mechanisms
to supplement the non-equity-based governance form through which multi-partner alliances
tend to be organized. Even if partners exchange equity, these additional coordination mechanisms are necessitated, as equity alone is insuffcient to protect against free riding and other
types of exchange hazards. Specifcally, in addition to generic guidelines, managers responsible
for forging multi-partner alliances may focus on the following areas:
•
A compensation structure that specifes partners’ tangible (fnancial) and intangible
(knowledge) outcomes in the short and long term.A clear compensation structure helps
prevent different expectations among partners as the alliance progresses and functions as
an incentive system. It preferably involves some form of advance payments (such as an
entrance fee) and rules about the ex-post distribution of outcomes (for example, royalties and transfer prices). Incentives include fnancial benefts, a larger share in the public
good and bonuses for completing tasks.The absence of a clear incentive system increases
ambiguity, which encourages free-riding behaviour.

262
•
•
•
•
•
Multi-partner alliances
Task organization in terms of allocating identifable and unique tasks to specifc partners.
Clear responsibility and transparency prompts responsibility and prevents free riding.
Ideally, decision-making and communication structures and processes are designed to
stimulate a collaborative working climate that provides suffcient incentives for each
partner to remain committed. However, because the relative weight of one partner might
differ from the next, responsibilities and authority should be adapted consistently.Voting
rights can be distributed consistently with contributions, but excessive dominant control
by one partner undermines collective efforts.
Preferably, an orchestrator’s function will be formalized.This could constitute a person or
a team of representatives that aims to resolve conficts originating from diverging interests, contributions, outcomes and expectations.An orchestrator is also responsible for the
entrance and integration of new members.
The monitoring of outcomes, processes and behaviours is critical for advancing the progress of multi-partner alliances. Rules and procedures should be formalized regarding
how and when to act if discrepancies are detected.
Clear exit provisions, to avoid partners being able to exit the alliance without having fulflled their contractual obligations, which could include elements such as sharing
knowledge and technologies. The absence of such provisions may lead to free-riding
behaviour from the exiting partner, which could decrease the trust and commitment of
the remaining partners.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking a multi-partner alliance view, general alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be
aware of two points. First, launch managers, acting as orchestrators representing the collective, should attempt to build and maintain a healthy collaborative climate.These managers are
responsible for enhancing the development of relational norms and capital between the parties involved in a multi-partner alliance.They must create a climate for building trust and be
aware of possible feelings of distrust among members in order to prevent or resolve free riding or other forms of opportunism. Second, acting as orchestrators, it is the launch manager’s
task to create clarity and suffcient detail in partners’ goals and contributions; such clarity is
prerequisite to formulate operational plans. It also allows them to observe promptly whether
all partners are suffciently committed to the alliance and are not withholding effort, information or resources.To accomplish these two tasks, it is critical that alliance launch managers act
as orchestrator, set up liaisons with and between partners, and work with them to defne and
fne-tune the multi-partner alliance’s value proposition.

Step 6: alliance management
When alliance management takes over leadership from the launch managers, it is their main
task to continue building a collaborative climate. For example, promoting face-to-face communication prior to formal decision making ensures that partners are motivated to participate
in such meetings. In addition, management should focus on the use of social sanctions to deter
partners from behaving dysfunctionally. It is the role of the management team to advance a
system of social sanctions and a shared understanding of when these social sanctions are to be
Multi-partner alliances
263
used and by whom. Social sanctions serve to weaken the reputation of the penalized parties
and limit their access to vital resources, particularly when partner reputation is connected
with the alliance or when there is strong partner dependency on the alliance.As the partnership progresses, under-performance might justify modifcations to the alliance design, including the incentive scheme, the sanction system and group size. Clear procedures are required in
order to prevent confict, stating when procedures may become effective, who can make the
appropriate decisions and what the consequences will be.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
Although the perspective of managing partners individually, using unique tasks and measuring
individual contributions looks promising, the inherent danger is that the overall alliance performance may be overlooked, along with the potential synergies that can be realized through
the collaborations between partners. Therefore, evaluation must also apply to alliance-wide
performance indicators for which all partners, or a subset of partners, have specifc responsibility. To this end, in addition to generic indicators, the performance metric system will
preferably be augmented with indicators that capture the following factors:
•
•
•
•
•
Objective and subjective indicators of multi-partner performance.
Short- and long-term performance objectives of individual partners and the partnership.
Fairness of value distribution across partners.
Individual partners’ task execution and performance.
Behavioural aspects, including free-riding behaviour and other forms of opportunism.

Step 8: alliance termination
The length of the term of the agreement is important, as are exit provisions specifying how
and when partners may exit or be forced to exit. Such clauses affect parties’ ability to leave a
multi-partner alliance that has become unproductive. Depending on the degree of integration, a termination plan may also involve procedures and guidelines for disintegration. For
example, withdrawal from a research consortium that has more than 100 members is usually
easier than pulling out of a highly integrated airline multi-partner alliance. Communication
strategies must also be developed because termination of the alliance or the departure of one
partner may have serious repercussions for the other partners.

Summary
A multi-partner alliance can be a win–win situation for all parties involved. However, multipartner alliances present their own set of unique risks. Whereas the likelihood of detecting
free-riding behaviour is relatively high in a bilateral alliance, within a multi-partner alliance,
the one-to-one relationship is replaced by a one-to-many relationship, which increases the risk
of undetected free-riding behaviour. Free riding occurs when partners act opportunistically by
not contributing to the alliance, while beneftting unequally from the outcomes of the alliance.
In order to deal effectively with this challenge, frms may require (new) partners to supply
unique resources, design alliances with suffcient protection (e.g. task organization), invest in
relational governance and install an orchestrator function to coordinate alliance activities.

264
Multi-partner alliances
CASE: SKYTEAM1
The airline industry is characterized by ferce competition between airlines and high levels
of regionalization, owing to national ties between airlines and their country of origin. This
translates into restrictions on landing rights and routes. Despite the deregulation of recent
decades, no single airline in the world is able to provide a global network. In order to build
and maintain a competitive advantage, airlines circumvent these strict regulations through
collaboration. For example, bilateral agreements, such as code sharing, allow airlines to
share their network, which enables passengers to complete a journey involving multiple
airlines using just one ticket. However, having recognized that bilateral agreements were
insuffcient to maintain their growth strategies, airlines started to initiate and participate in
multi-partner alliances.
The establishment of the Star Alliance in 1997 by United Airlines, Lufthansa, Air Canada,
Thai Airways and Scandinavian Airline System (SAS) constituted the frst global airline network. The Star Alliance example was soon to be followed by the Oneworld alliance in 1999.
SkyTeam was the third alliance to be created in 2000.1 The primary motivation for SkyTeam
was to create a globe-spanning network of routes and airports. Therefore, the most important contribution that partners within the SkyTeam alliance make is their network of routes
and airports. Initially, SkyTeam consisted of four founding airlines: Aeroméxico, Air France,
Delta Airlines and Korean Air. In 2001, KLM merged with Air France, while in the North
American market, Northwest and Continental airlines had already formed a partnership.
This partnership was expanded with Delta Airlines forming an important North American
bloc. Within Europe, Air France and Alitalia were part of the SkyTeam alliance. The merger
between KLM and Air France strengthened the European bloc. Combining both blocs within
SkyTeam provided SkyTeam with a key asset: transatlantic routes. SkyTeam currently consists of Aerofot, Aeroméxico, Air Europa, Air France, Alitalia, China Southern Airlines, Czech
Airlines, Delta Airlines, Kenya Airways, KLM, Korean Air, TAROM and Vietnam Airlines, offering a worldwide network. This constellation of multiple airlines presented SkyTeam with
the challenge of aligning varying interests and preventing dysfunctional behaviour such
as free riding. By carefully selecting its partners and requiring them to pay a membership
fee, and incorporating active alliance management and specifc decision-making structures,
SkyTeam was able to ensure alliance viability.
SkyTeam developed an extensive partner recruitment policy consisting of multiple stages.
The primary criteria for selecting potential partners are (1) the network the potential partners can contribute to the alliance and (2) the access a partner can provide to new markets
in, for instance, developing regions and countries. In other words, SkyTeam reduced internal
competition by minimizing substitution of routes and airports within the alliance. Guided by
these criteria and building on the results of preliminary assessments, SkyTeam may decide to
proceed to the next stage, introducing a new member of the SkyTeam alliance. During this
next phase, the alliance terms and conditions are discussed. An important factor in this negotiation phase is the partner’s ability to meet SkyTeam’s requirements. These requirements
cover aspects concerning fight safety, airline organization and IT infrastructure. The time it
takes to fulfl these requirements means the negotiation phase typically takes between one
and two years. Meeting these requirements sometimes requires airlines to make signifcant
changes and investments within their organization and operations. Becoming a member of
an airline alliance is often critical for long-term airline viability, so airlines are willing to make
Multi-partner alliances
265
these investments. In most cases, SkyTeam appoints a buddy airline (sponsor) that helps
the airline meet the SkyTeam requirements. Through this buddy system, new partnership
members are introduced to partnership rules and routines, translating into easier integration
within the alliance. In addition to the process of becoming a member of SkyTeam, partners
must also agree to pay an alliance fee. This fee covers general alliance expenses such as
marketing, communication and management costs.
SkyTeam has seen its alliance management structure develop, and a transition was made
from a decentralized to a centralized management structure. During the frst decade of the
alliance, SkyTeam employed a decentralized management structure. Coordination of alliance
activities was designated to airline managers. Whereas Oneworld and the Star Alliance opted
for a more costly centralized alliance offce, SkyTeam was able to economize on overhead
costs. Having a limited number of partners, a decentralized management model fulflled
SkyTeam purposes. However, the increased complexity, which was mainly caused by the
increased number of partners, increased the need for more centralized control. To this end,
a specialized alliance offce was established. Acting as an orchestrator, this offce was made
responsible for managing airline contributions, overall performance, collective decision making and managing projects and analyses to identify and incorporate potential new partners.
Decision making was formalized by securing a collective competitive advantage and
managing the pluralistic interests within SkyTeam. At the strategic level, the governing
board consists of the CEOs of each airline, who meet twice a year and discuss general alliance developments and its strategic direction. The potential for new partners to join is also
a responsibility of the governing board. Accepting a new partner requires a ‘super majority’
of 85 per cent, and blocking votes are not allowed. The supervisory board acts as a steering committee and is occupied with more daily affairs within the alliance, and it monitors
the activities of the central alliance offce. This board meets six times each year and decides
on specifc projects that will be executed. The alliance offce is in charge of the daily monitoring of project execution and reports to the supervisory board. The chair of the alliance
offce is also the chair of the governing board. The alliance offce monitors general airline
performance and keeps track of customer complaints. If airlines are not in compliance with
SkyTeam standards, the supervisory board discusses measures that will be taken to ensure
airline compliance. SkyTeam has an elaborate compensation structure; based on each airline’s performance, size and position, that airline receives an appropriate share of the benefts. The alliance offce is responsible for maintaining the compensation structures for each
airline but also for developing and implementing new initiatives.
In 2020, Skyteam launched ‘SkyCare&Protect’, for example. A hygiene and safety initiative in response to rapidly changing regulations, targeting customers and employees across
its global network of 19 members. Through this initiative, SkyTeam provides customers
with all the information they need—including the latest travel restrictions and how and
where to book pre-travel COVID tests—so customers comply before they fy. In addition
to digital enhancements, health and hygiene protocols include intense aircraft sanitizing,
mandatory mask wearing, frequent access to hand sanitizer stations at hubs, safe distancing, onboard service adjustments and more. In 2022, airlines Delta and Aeromexico were
the frst two members to implement the alliance-frst technology powered by SkyTeam’s
Digital Spine. This technology enables digital check-in for multi-airline travel via airlines’
existing apps or websites. SkyTeam’s seamless check-in forms a key part of the alliance’s
SkyCare&Protect program.

266
Multi-partner alliances
SkyTeam is fourishing. Although the alliance is becoming increasingly complex as a
result of its new members and a collective strategy to integrate the partner airlines further to
further exploit synergies, recent reorganization of the management structure and the high
maturity level of alliance procedures and relational capital have increased the chances that
SkyTeam will prosper in the future.

Questions
1
2
3
Explain how competition is diferent in the airline industry for autonomous frms than
for groups of frms connected through a multi-partner alliance.
Why is free riding a typical exchange hazard for multi-partner alliances? Assess the quality of the measures that SkyTeam took to prevent it.
Under what conditions is decentralized or centralized governance more likely to result
in superior performance for individual alliance members and the multi-partner alliance?

Note
1 Interview with a senior executive of KLM; SkyTeam (2021, 2022).

18
ALLIANCE PORTFOLIOS
A frm may maintain multiple alliance relationships that, together, constitute a frm’s alliance
portfolio. By extending their focus beyond the management of single alliances to one that
incorporates their alliance portfolios, frms gain additional opportunities to enhance their
competitive advantage. A central issue then becomes how a frm can generate, confgure and
develop a high-performing alliance portfolio, as frm performance depends not only on the
success or failure of single alliances, but also on the frm’s bundle of alliances.To realize portfolio synergies, frms must proactively design and manage the linkages and interdependencies
between their partners of different alliances. However, alliance portfolios also tend to increase
management complexity, coordination costs and the risk of conficts. To be able to realize
superior portfolio performance, it is important for managers to understand what an alliance
portfolio is (frst section) and how to design and manage a high-performing alliance portfolio
(second section).The next section of this chapter also provides a set of guidelines that explain
how alliance portfolio management impacts the governance of single alliances. The chapter
concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The meaning of an alliance portfolio
Firms wishing to successfully implement strategies cannot rely on a single alliance and are
increasingly using different kinds of alliances, including contractual alliances, joint ventures
and consortia, to improve their competitive advantage. In addition, many frms have established alliances with customers, suppliers, competitors and other kinds of public and private
organizations.The way that a focal frm organizes these intertwined relationships has a notable infuence on its competitiveness, which means that a goal-oriented alliance portfolio
approach could play a decisive role in frm performance (Hoffmann 2007). By adopting an
alliance portfolio approach, a frm shifts its focus from single-alliance governance to systematic governance of its bundle of alliances (see Table 18.1 for examples).The argument is that
frms can beneft from engaging in multiple simultaneous alliances that may not be available if
the frm had only one alliance at a given point in time. In other words, the linkages and interdependencies between a frm’s alliance partners provide additional opportunities for synergy.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-18
268
Alliance portfolios
TABLE 18.1 Examples of alliance portfolios
TerraVia Holdings Inc
Before being acquired by Corbion in 2017,TerraVia Holdings Inc. (formerly known as Solazyme), was
a renewable oil and bioproducts company and a leader in industrial biotechnology. Founded in 2003
and headquartered in San Francisco, its technology allows microbes to produce oil and biomaterials in
standard fermentation facilities quickly, effciently and at large scale. In 2003, they allied with Bunge.
Bunge buys, sells, stores and transports oilseeds and grains; processes oilseeds to make protein meal
for animal feed and edible oil products; and produces sugar and ethanol from sugarcane. In 2010, the
partners extended the alliance to develop microbe-derived oils utilizing Brazilian sugar cane feedstock.
In 2011, a partnership with Dow Chemical Company was forged to develop bio-based dielectric
fuids. Dow signed a letter of intent to use up to 20 million gallons of TerraVia’s algal derived oils
in 2013 and up to 60 million gallons in 2015. In 2017, Corbion, a food and specialty ingredients
company, acquired TerraVia.Whereas TerraVia’s IP portfolio and R&D pipeline, as well as its
partnerships with industry leaders, provide high-growth opportunities for the new division, Cobrion
continued to forge partnerships in support of TerraVia’s goals. For example, Corbion teamed up with
Cargill and other food manufacturers to promote adoption of regenerative agriculture practices that
lower CO2 emissions, preserve agricultural productivity and enable long-term food security.
Starbucks Coffee Company
Starbuck Coffee Company was founded in 1971.Their mission is to inspire and nurture the human
spirit—one person, one cup and one neighbourhood at a time. From the beginning, Starbuck’s
purpose extends beyond proft. It would like to be (1) leading in sustainability, (2) strengthening
communities and (3) creating opportunities.To realize its objectives, they depend on multiple
partnerships. For example in 2021, Starbuck Coffee Company launched a new store concept in New
York City, together with Amazon.The new store integrates the digital and physical retail experience,
bringing together the connection and comfort of a Starbucks café and convenience of Amazon Go’s
Just Walk Out Shopping experience. Ahead of its 30th Annual Meeting of Shareholders in 2022,
Starbucks affrmed its bold aspiration to be a resource positive company—giving back more than
it takes from the planet.They announced a new pilot programme with Volvo to help electrify a
driving route from the Colorado Rockies to Seattle. Moreover in 2022, Starbucks Coffee Company
announced partnership with Delta Air Lines that will offer members of Delta SkyMiles and
Starbucks® Rewards, two of America’s most highly regarded loyalty programmes, the ability to unlock
even more ways to earn rewards at Delta and Starbucks.
Sources: Algeanews (2011); Business Wire (2011a); Corbion (2017); Energyboom (2011); Grooms (2008); PR Web
(2011); SBMC (2022a, 2022b); Starbuck Coffee Company (2021, 2022a, 2022b, 2022c).

Firms build and maintain alliance portfolios for purposes that go beyond those of entering into individual alliances. By pursuing multiple goals through a number of simultaneous
alliances, frms mitigate risk and uncertainty and may obtain greater alliance benefts overall
(Chiambaretto and Fernandez 2016; Hoffmann 2007; van Wijk and Nadolska 2020). For
example, when suppliers provide complementary offerings, managing proactively the connections between them enables a frm to achieve economies of scale. In addition, whereas
single alliances are generally considered critical mechanisms for accessing valuable resources,
an alliance portfolio, and thus the simultaneous access to a broad range of valuable resources
from different partners, can be an effective means of enhancing a frm’s resource endowment
(Lavie 2006). For example, synergies occur in an alliance portfolio when partners from different alliances are stimulated to create and exchange knowledge. Furthermore, by drawing on
the social network perspective, frms can use alliance portfolios to capitalize on information
Alliance portfolios
269
advantages (Parise and Casher 2003). Examples include existing portfolio partners providing
valuable information about existing and potential partners. A history of joint collaboration
across the portfolio reduces transaction costs and reinforces partners’ reputations. Next, alliance portfolios can reinforce frms’ internationalization efforts (García-Canal et al. 2002).
Having international partners in the alliance portfolio could provide additional benefts, such
as access to new resources, information and capabilities, that may not be available from local
partners. Multiple simultaneous alliances with different partners can also help frms to create
a more substantial experience base with which to accelerate institutionalization of best practices for governing alliances (Anand and Khanna 2000). Thus, a proactive alliance portfolio
approach involves the creation of tighter coordination among alliance partners by exploiting
interdependencies between them to achieve portfolio synergies.
However, portfolio management is more complex and demanding than governing single
alliances (Parise and Casher 2003).Whereas facilitating interdependencies between partners in
different alliances presents certain opportunities, it may also constrain a frm’s value creation
potential because these linkages expose a frm to unique hazards. Any attempt at collaboration between partners from two different alliances with opposing objectives, such as competitors in the same industry, is likely to meet resistance.The frms are probably unwilling to
share valuable product, customer and market information, or new business opportunities, for
fear that this information would become available to their rival. Similarly, when partners are
members of competing networks or promote competing technologies, attempts by any frm
to capitalize on interdependencies are most likely to cause confict and tension. In addition,
one single alliance may exhibit such high exclusivity that it prevents a frm from working
effectively with other partners. For example, an alliance with a market leader may impede
alliances with smaller niche players in the same product space.The partnership with the market leader is most likely to use the majority of the frm’s resources, including the time of the
dedicated sales force. In turn, the smaller partners may become dissatisfed with their inability
to expand the alliance because of the rival partner.Thus, constraining interdependencies lead
to distrust, lower transparency and decreased commitment. However, alliance portfolios with
constraining interdependencies are not unheard of; a well-formulated alliance approach can
curb the negative consequences.
In summary, a portfolio approach is unlike single-alliance governance in that it includes
explicitly the design and management that facilitates and constrains interdependencies
between partners of different alliances. Firms that embrace an alliance portfolio approach
can enhance their competitiveness as the overall value created by an alliance portfolio with
adequate governance is greater than the sum of the values created by each individual alliance
in the portfolio (see Box 18.1). However, whereas a proactive alliance portfolio approach
involves facilitating interdependencies between partners, constraining interdependencies can
undermine the realization of portfolio synergies. Firms can use portfolio design and management to deal effectively with this unique challenge.

Alliance portfolio governance
The issue of alliance portfolio design and management revolves around what type of partners
to incorporate in the portfolio (Ozmel and Guler 2015) and, in connection with this, what
type of portfolio management is necessary (Zheng and Yang 2015).A frst fundamental task is
then formulating a portfolio strategy to the end of a goal-oriented alliance portfolio approach.

270
Alliance portfolios
BOX 18.1 TOYOTA’S SUPPLIERS’ PORTFOLIO
In 1988, Toyota started producing cars in the United States. At this time, Toyota’s
suppliers had virtually no contact with each other, so Toyota formed the core of a
network with bilateral arm’s-length supplier relationships. Each party pursued its
own individual objectives while maintaining its independence, and relationships were
organized through formal contracts, the outcomes of which were determined through
power. Toyota faced the challenge of how it could improve efciency and innovation to
respond to shifting customer demands. Over the next few years, Toyota implemented a
learning plan consisting of three phases. Phase 1 was to develop weak ties among suppliers. In 1989, Toyota initiated a supplier association (BAMA). Phase 2 was to develop
strong ties between the suppliers and Toyota. To this end, the company ofered trained
consultants to BAMA members at no cost. In Phase 3, to develop strong ties among
suppliers, Toyota divided its suppliers into small learning teams. After the completion
of its plan, Toyota had built an efective knowledge-sharing network of suppliers consisting of multi-lateral relationships with strong direct and indirect ties, through which
explicit and tacit knowledge was exchanged. Trust between participants governed the
relationship through fairness, interdependence and open informal contracts. Toyota’s
network solution increased its knowledge-sharing by devising methods that would
motivate members to share valuable knowledge openly (while preventing undesirable
spillovers to competitors), prevent free riders and reduce the costs associated with fnding and accessing diferent types of valuable knowledge. Toyota’s network, which is
characterized by a variety of institutionalized routines and a collective identity, facilitates multi-directional knowledge fows among its suppliers.
Sources: Dyer (1996); Dyer and Nobeoka (2000).

Essentially, frms can use one of two different alliance portfolio strategies (Hoffmann 2007;
Yang et al. 2014). First, frms may focus on exploration, which then makes the purpose of
an alliance portfolio to acquire new resources and capabilities through alliance relationships.
For example, adopting an exploration strategy suggests that alliances are used to develop new
technologies, fundamentally improve product lines and develop new service offerings to meet
changing customer needs. Second, an exploitation strategy relies on using existing resources
effciently and protecting competitive advantages as much as possible. An alliance portfolio
then functions as a vehicle to stabilize the environment, and alliances are used to refne and
leverage built-up resources.The composition of alliance portfolios (i.e. functional heterogeneity) has also been associated with liquidating events, such as IPO and acquisitions (HoehnWeiss and Karim 2014). Firms can also use their alliance portfolios to seek a balance between
exploration and exploitation strategies. A portfolio can provide quick and fexible access to
different kinds of resources, while also reducing environmental uncertainty by developing
long-term stable alliances (Bakker and Knoben 2014).The key is not the success or failure of
a single alliance but whether a frm reaches its exploration and/or exploitation objectives by
means of its alliance portfolio.Therefore, the design and management of the alliance portfolio
is at the centre of interest (see Table 18.2).

Alliance portfolios
271
TABLE 18.2 Alliance portfolio governance
Portfolio design
Portfolio management
Objective
An effcient portfolio confguration in
support of the alliance portfolio strategy.

Management of inter-partner linkages
between set of alliance partners.

Focus
A frm’s confguration of intertwined
alliances in which facilitating
interdependencies are maximized
and constraining interdependencies
minimized.

Capturing portfolio synergies through
active management of alliance formation
and termination and coordination of
inter-partner knowledge and resource
fows.

Mechanisms
Portfolio size
• Large or small portfolios
Structural
• Redundancy or non-redundancy
Governance
• Weak or strong ties
Partner
• Heterogeneous or homogeneous
Knowledge management
• Develop knowledge infrastructure
between alliance partners.
Internal coordination
• Orchestration and alignment of
internal organization with alliance
portfolio.

Sources: Parise and Casher (2003); Wassmer (2008).

Alliance portfolio design
The challenge of portfolio design is to confgure a set of intertwined alliances in such a
way that maximizes portfolio synergies (that is, exploits facilitating interdependencies) and
minimizes coordination costs (that is, controls constraining interdependencies). An effcient
portfolio design determines the quality, quantity and diversity of information and resources
to which the focal company has access, the effciency of getting access to these resources and
the fexibility or stability of the frm’s position in the industry (Baum et al. 2000). Prior studies on alliance portfolio design have identifed various design parameters, including (1) a size
dimension, (2) a structural dimension, (3) a governance dimension, (4) functional dimensions
and (5) a partner diversity dimension (Golonka 2015; Hoehn-Weiss and Karim 2014; Jiang
et al. 2010;Wassmer 2008, 2010).
The size dimension pertains to characteristics such as the number of alliances and partners. Some studies, primarily those that have examined entrepreneurial biotechnology frms
and technological performance, suggest that larger alliance portfolios are more likely to
result in portfolio synergies, such as innovation output rates (Shan et al. 1994). However,
other studies report that once a frm’s alliance portfolio has reached a certain size, any
additional alliance will provide diminishing returns. For example, Deeds and Hill (1998)
report a curvilinear relationship between the number of alliances held by an entrepreneurial
biotechnology frm and the frm’s rate of new product development. Lahiri and Narayanan
(2013) report that highly innovative frms beneft less from increasing alliance portfolio size
than less innovative frms with respect to fnancial performance. Contrary to studies that
focus solely on portfolio size, this book suggests that portfolio size alone is not a suffcient
predictor of portfolio performance and is outweighed by other design parameters (Yoon
et al. 2015). For example, Castiglioni and Galán González (2020) show that portfolio size in
combination with portfolio coordination enables frms to yield superior value from their
alliance portfolio.

272
Alliance portfolios
The structural dimension pertains to the level of redundancy across alliances within the
portfolio. Redundancy within an alliance portfolio is the result of a frm collaborating with
multiple partners that make similar contributions. The main advantage is that redundancy
provides a frm with multiple access points to critical resources, valuable knowledge and
information about existing and potential partners. A frm itself is also more visible for frms
seeking partnering opportunities (Ahuja 2000). In contrast, an alliance portfolio characterized by non-redundant relationships (that is, where each alliance makes a unique contribution) enables frms to enhance portfolio performance by leveraging and exploiting resources
obtained through the few specialized alliances they have. Koka and Prescott (2008) show
that, when confronted with a radical change in the environment, an entrepreneurial alliance
portfolio (redundant) outperforms both a prominent alliance portfolio (non-redundant) and
a hybrid confguration.This suggests that distinct structural confgurations can enhance portfolio performance, yet the impact of portfolio structure is likely to be conditioned by other
factors, including governance form and partner characteristics (Wassmer 2008).
The governance dimension pertains to the level of commitment, degree of integration and
learning of alliances in the portfolio (Jiang et al. 2010); this is also referred to as tie strength.
Strong ties, such as equity-based arrangements, serve as vehicles for learning and information
exchange, as partners are highly interconnected through reciprocal fnancial and organizational relationships (Hoffmann 2007).An alliance portfolio composed of primarily strong ties
has a positive effect on a focal frm’s innovative capabilities, especially if they are trust-based,
knowledge-intensive and reinforced through relationship-specifc investments (Capaldo 2007;
Yang et al. 2014). Alternatively, an alliance portfolio composed of primarily weak ties, such
as non-equity-based arrangements, provides frms with strategic fexibility as these relationships are more easily established and terminated (Bakker and Knoben 2014). Such portfolio
confgurations tend to support exploitation strategies (Yang et al. 2014). Firms that build a
homogeneous portfolio of governance forms tend to experience higher performance (Jiang
et al. 2010) as repeated experience with a specifc governance form often translates into
institutionalized knowledge that can be readily applied to future alliances, thereby reducing
managerial costs (Sampson 2005). However, a homogenous portfolio with primarily strong
ties can also have a negative effect on a focal frm’s innovative capabilities by stimulating a
vicious circle in which a reduced number of contacts, decreased fexibility for collaboration
with new partners and diminishing responsiveness to new market trends reinforce each other.
In a similar fashion, frms are more likely to opt for a prespecifed short-term alliance than
for a long-term alliance when environmental factors increase the need for strategic fexibility
in managing their alliance portfolio (Bakker and Knoben 2014).Thus, whereas heterogeneity
in governance forms (and time horizon) within an alliance portfolio enables a frm to realize
multiple objectives simultaneously, homogeneity tends to reduce coordination costs.
The partner diversity dimension refers to partner-related characteristics, among which
include partner industry (e.g. convergence/divergence), organizational characteristics (e.g.
similar/dissimilar), nationality (e.g. focal/foreign) and functional orientation (e.g. upstream/
downstream) (Golonka 2015; Jiang et al. 2010; Sukoco 2015; Wassmer 2010). Because no
single frm can possess all of the critical resources required for long-term success, an effective
means of achieving a frm’s objectives is to ally with partners operating in different industries. Partners from the same industry are often competitors whose overlapping backgrounds,
experiences, knowledge and technological bases may provide learning in the form of imitation and greater absorptive capacity. However, conficts of interest do exist, and learning races
Alliance portfolios
273
can happen, which increases monitoring and safeguarding costs. For example, Lavie (2007)
fnds that the relative bargaining power of partners in the alliance portfolio constrains the
frm’s appropriation capacity, especially when many of these partners compete in the focal
frm’s industry. However, the frm’s market performance (e.g. market share) improves with
the intensity of competition among partners in its alliance portfolio.Thus a holistic approach
towards alliance portfolios to prevent competition among portfolio partners is pivotal for
sustainable alliance strategies and benefcial portfolio outcomes (Park et al. 2015). In contrast,
although collaboration with partners from different industries tends to increase coordination costs, owing to different routines and processes that can make collaboration diffcult,
it also leads to novel resources, knowledge and information. In support of these insights,
Sukoco (2015) reports that compared to convergent learning (portfolio proximate to industry domain), divergence learning (i.e. portfolio distant from industry domain) contributes
greater to market performance, particularly when partners are relatively independent from
one another. Golonka (2015) corroborates these fndings and suggests that proactively searching for and selecting strangers, as opposed to friends and acquaintances, as potential partners
positively affects the complexity of alliance portfolios (e.g. functional, geographical and governance); complexity in turn is expected to enhance a frm’s innovativeness. Like industry
diversity within an alliance portfolio, organizational characteristics, nationality and functional
orientation all have positive and negative performance implications. Consider functional orientation for example: frms employ a mixture of marketing, manufacturing and distribution
alliances to broaden their market reach and enhance value creation, and for further exploitation of core competences; a primary focus on R&D alliances, on the other hand, enables frms
to build new capabilities and competences. Thus, variation in partners’ characteristics plays
a role in determining the benefts and costs that frms derive from their alliance portfolios.
It is clear from the earlier discussion that each portfolio design parameter associates positively or negatively with (different types of) performance; though empirical evidence tends
to inhibit conclusive comparisons as studies tend to be fragmented in their use of portfolio confguration and performance measures.To explain the effects of portfolio diversity for
example, Goerzen and Beamish (2005) focus on the effect of geographical, product and partner diversity on MNE’s economic performance, whereas Yoon and colleagues (2015) focus
on portfolio size and organizational diversity to explain knowledge creation in small bio-tech
frms. Nevertheless, we proffer that the portfolio design dimensions combined constitute an
alliance portfolio confguration and that a confguration is ‘high performing’ when it supports
an alliance portfolio strategy (Castiglioni and Galán González 2020). In additive portfolio
approach, frms refrain from any systematic approach, since each alliance is managed individually, without any strategic intent for the set of alliances. A strategic portfolio approach adds a
strategic component to the portfolio, guided by a frm’s strategic objectives (Hoffmann 2005).
More specifcally, contrasting exploration and exploitation strategies with distinct portfolio
designs leads to two generic implications:
•
An exploration strategy is more likely to be effectuated when an alliance portfolio has
a set of redundant alliances, primarily weak ties and diverse partner characteristics. The
resulting heterogeneity increases the richness of information and resources, broadens
search options, improves a frm’s ability to develop new capabilities and increase its visibility in the broader industry network, which in turn enhances performance.The downside is that a frm may fall into a learning trap, and the coordination costs are very high.

274
•
Alliance portfolios
An exploitation strategy is more likely to be effectuated when an alliance portfolio has a
set of non-redundant alliances, strong ties and uniform partner characteristics.The resulting homogeneity enables a frm to build and leverage a specialized resource pool, exploit
existing capabilities and react fexibly and quickly to changing circumstances.This may
cause a frm to fall into a competence trap, but the coordination costs are relatively low.

The implications outlined earlier are generic (see Figure 18.1), and frms may seek alternative
confgurations (i.e. different combinations of design parameters) in support of their objectives.
For example, when a frm adopts an exploration strategy but seeks some degree of fexibility in
its research efforts, weak ties are preferable to strong ties. However, a frm can replace weak ties
with strong ties when more stability is required during the development stage. Alternatively,
if an exploitation strategy requires multiple sources of resources, partner diversity is preferable
to uniformity. Critical is that the design parameters are internally consistent as, for example,
shown in a study by Castro et al. (2015) who report that portfolio capital mediates the relationship between portfolio confguration and market share growth. Irrespective of strategy
and confguration, however, obtaining a high standing (i.e. frm’s rank in expected returns
compared to other portfolio partners) in an alliance portfolio positively associates with the
frm’s access to the partner’s resources and the frm’s performance (Ozmel and Guler 2015).
When seeking a balance between exploration and exploitation strategies, frms may also
seek to establish an integrated or hybrid confguration (i.e. parallel), thereby simultaneously
accommodating exploration and exploitation requirements. Alternatively, a frm may use a
structural confguration in which an organization develops two separate portfolio confgurations to accommodate exploration and exploitation requirements, respectively. A frm may
also use a temporal confguration in which an alliance portfolio is restructured over time to
accommodate subsequent exploration and exploitation requirements; for example, a portfolio
confguration may evolve with a product life cycle.
The confguration of an alliance portfolio is generally not static and may actually change
over time through the formation of new alliances and the termination of existing ones. Firms
are often forced to change the confguration of their alliance portfolios if they are to improve
their competitive position vis-à-vis their rivals in an industry, or simply to secure their competitive advantage. Adding, replacing or removing alliance partners may infuence the facilitating and constraining interdependencies within the alliance portfolio.Therefore, instead of
Alliances
as stand-alone entities
weak tie
FIGURE 18.1
strong tie
Alliance portfolio with
exploitation orientation
focal firm
Actor type A
Generic alliance portfolio confgurations
Alliance portfolio with
exploration orientation
Actor type B
Actor type C
Alliance portfolios
275
adding and removing partners opportunistically, conveniently or randomly, frms should adopt
a proactive alliance portfolio approach. For example, a pharmaceutical company may envision a portfolio that consists of research and development alliances with biotech companies
during the discovery stage of a drug’s product life cycle, but a dramatically different portfolio
involving marketing alliances with drug delivery or other pharmaceutical companies during
the commercialization stages of the product’s life cycle.Whereas an effcient alliance portfolio confguration can provide a frm with the desired synergetic effects, constraining interdependencies will limit willingness to share knowledge, decrease transparency, undermine
communication and adversely affect trust building.To overcome these negative repercussions,
frms must complement portfolio design with portfolio management (Castiglioni and Galán
González 2020).

Portfolio management
Portfolio management (or coordination) pertains to governance of the set of alliances and
the linkages between partners. The design and management of single-alliance relationships
are critical; however, to secure a competitive advantage, frms must extend single-alliance
governance with portfolio management (Haider and Mariotti 2016). Research has shown, for
example, that the relation between alliance portfolio size and alliance portfolio benefts lies at
a higher level for frms coordinating their alliance portfolios (Wijk and Nadolska 2020).The
two management factors that allow frms to maximize their return on their alliance portfolio
are knowledge management and internal coordination (Parise and Casher 2003; Wassmer
2008, 2010).
When managing an alliance portfolio, it is critical to initiate some form of knowledge
management targeted at knowledge creation and exchange between partners. The degree
to which a frm captures, shares and leverages information and knowledge across its alliance
portfolio, as well as the mechanisms it has in place to promote communication among its
partners’ alliance managers, has a direct effect on its performance. Zheng and Yang (2015)
show for example that familiarity about the inter-organizational routines between partners
in an alliance portfolio facilitates knowledge integration, which stimulates new knowledge
discovery. However, the repeatedness of same-partner R&D projects within a frm’s alliance
portfolio has a negative effect on breakthrough innovations. Examples of knowledge practices
include designated project teams, a secure extranet, a directory that contains contact details,
a virtual team room, joint training and education and a repository with important alliance
documents. For example, Dyer and Nobeoka (2000) showed that intentionally facilitating
knowledge transfer between Toyota’s suppliers increased those companies’ commitment to
share valuable knowledge, prevented free riding and reduced the costs associating with fnding and accessing knowledge.Thus, knowledge management targeted at knowledge exchange
between partners in an alliance portfolio increases awareness of partners’ abilities, enables
inter-frm knowledge creation and stimulates partner referral. In addition, knowledge management practices may involve intra-frm knowledge sharing, which improves insights in alliance portfolio opportunities as well as professionalism in alliance management. Instruments
that can be deployed include the creation of best practices, formal and informal communication structures, the creation of communities of practice and the implementation of IT infrastructure. Knowledge management is important, therefore, as it enables frms to overcome
constraining interdependencies by increasing the cohesion between partners in the alliance
portfolio, which in turn allows them to exploit facilitating interdependencies.

276
Alliance portfolios
Managing an alliance portfolio requires the internal coordination of alliance activities,
which will enable a frm to orchestrate the linkages between alliance partners. Internal coordination helps frms to align the alliance portfolio strategy with the separate parts of the
organization (such as corporate and business units). Most alliances are initiated on an operational level as ad hoc responses to local business issues. A business unit will forge an alliance
that serves its own (business unit) objectives, often without realizing the impact this has on
other parts of the organization or frm as a whole.This silo-thinking approach could create
situations that are not only conficting but also costly. For example, when a newly formed alliance overlaps in products and markets with existing partners’ businesses, a frm may not only
incur increased confict resolution costs but also have to bear the consequences associated
with dissolving pre-existing alliances. Communication structures and information exchange
between managers operating at different levels and businesses allows managers to keep up
to date with latest developments in strategy and adapt their alliances accordingly. Managers
become informed about alliance initiatives outside their responsibility, which reduces the
risk of forging alliances that undermine portfolio performance. Internal coordination also
involves a systematic approach to defning and measuring portfolio performance. In addition to metrics that capture the performance of single alliances, a performance metric system
should include measures of the entire portfolio’s performance.Although alliance metrics may
indicate that a single alliance generates superior performance, portfolio metrics may reveal
that it undermines portfolio performance. Taken together, internal coordination provides a
holistic approach to a frm’s set of alliances, which enables the frm to identify and resolve
opportunities and threats within the alliance portfolio. Some frms may establish a separate
department to coordinate all these alliance-related activities.

Alliance portfolio dynamics
With respect to alliance portfolio dynamics, little attention has been directed at the question
of how and why frms change the confguration of their alliance portfolio over time (Cui
2013; Wassmer 2010). Most studies describe portfolio evolution as driven by endogenous
path-dependent alliance formation decisions that take a unidirectional causal effect on portfolio evolutionary trajectories, where decisions to alter the alliance portfolio are guided by a
combination of internal inducements and the availability of alliance opportunities (Lavie and
Singh 2012). For example, Gulati (1995a) suggests that a frm’s decision to engage in new alliances is signifcantly based on the accumulation of its prior alliance ties, which forms a social
context in which the focal frm fnds itself embedded when deciding with whom to partner
now and in the near future. Focusing on alliance termination, Cui (2013) reports that resource
dissimilarity between partners in an alliance portfolio may be less supportive of, or even detrimental to, the continuity of an alliance; this negative effect may, however, be countered for
example through strong inter-partner linkages.
An alternative approach towards portfolio development takes a life-cycle perspective,
focusing on how alliance portfolios develop over time and on their confgurative evolution
as a result of frm action and coordination. Dyer and Nobeoka (2000) report on their study
of the Toyota case and suggest that Toyota produced a knowledge network that evolved ‘from
weak ties, to strong bilateral ties with the convener (Toyota), to strong multi-lateral ties among
suppliers’. Likewise, Hite and Hesterly (2001) suggest that a frm’s portfolio develops from primarily dense, cohesive, and path dependent at a frm’s emergence into a network that consists
of both embedded and arm’s-length ties, structural holes and being intentionally managed.

Alliance portfolios
277
Lavie and Singh (2012) complement the previous with the inclusion of co-evolutionary
mechanisms as a potential driver of portfolio evolution. Studying the case of Unisys Corporation, a US-based technology company, they fnd four idiosyncratic interacting processes that
infuenced portfolio evolution, namely (1) co-evolution, referring to the process of adjusting
the alliance portfolio confguration as a result of changes in the focal frm’s strategic orientation, while changes to its alliance portfolio would support or constrain the implementation of
strategies; (2) external stimuli, referring to stimuli that instigate the (co-)evolutionary process
referred to earlier, such as changes in the technological environment; (3) inertial pressures,
referring to internal crises and processes of resistance to change that would delay or alter the
portfolio evolution; and (4) restructuring and realignment, referring to organizational structural changes that would promote changes in the alliance organization in order to realign
portfolio confguration and strategy. Taken together, the foregoing makes clear that alliance
portfolio evolution is a phenomenon that must be considered from a range of perspectives
when seeking to understand its drivers as well as its course of development. Future research
may take on this endeavour.

Alliance portfolio: decision-making steps
A traditional perspective considers alliances as isolated transactions. However, frms that adopt
an alliance portfolio approach create new opportunities to improve their competitive advantage (Wassmer and Dussauge 2012). Many frms’ alliance portfolios are confgured and managed ineffciently and often represent nothing more than a random mix of strategic alliances
that sometimes even have conficting demands. In contrast, managers in frms with highperforming alliance portfolios visualize their portfolio in the context of the entire network
rather than as a series of single partnerships.These managers have a holistic visualization of the
possible interdependencies among (potential) partners, which broadens their range of strategic actions.The next section connects alliance portfolio thinking to the stages of the alliance
development framework depicted in Figure 18.2 in order to provide insights into the effcient
governance of single alliances in light of the broader alliance portfolio.

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
Before managers decide which governance mode (make, ally or buy) suits their objectives, an
alliance portfolio approach helps them assess the extent to which an alliance will strengthen
the alliance portfolio (that is, facilitate interdependencies) or weaken it (that is, constrain
interdependencies).Taking the alliance portfolio as a departure point, a clear alliance portfolio
strategy that is consistent with a frm’s corporate and/or business strategy will enable managers to determine the preferred portfolio confguration. Periodic scenario-planning exercises
can be a useful tool for analyzing the effects of adding, removing and replacing specifc alliance partners in the alliance portfolio. Communicating the portfolio strategy across business
units increases transparency and allows expectations to be managed accordingly. Managers
will understand the changes being made in portfolio composition as they will ft the portfolio
strategy that has been communicated. By incorporating a portfolio approach (that is, considering the linkages between partners) in the strategic analysis, frms become aware of synergies
and constraints among multiple alliance partners, which in turn inform their governance
mode decision making. That is, they understand the degree to which an alliance depicts an
alternative that is preferable to internalization or market exchange.

278
Alliance portfolios
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Formulate alliance portfolio strategy consistent with corporate and/or
business strategy.
Extend strategic analysis by assessing the extent to which a single
alliance contributes to alliance portfolio performance; consider tradeoff between cost– benefit analysis single alliance and alliance portfolio.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Extend partner analysis by assessing the extent to which a partner
strengthens/weakens the alliance portfolio.
Assess adverse impacts of alliance partner and portfolio misfits.

3
Alliance
negotiation
4
Alliance
design
Design decision should take account of the desired portfolio design;
governance form, contractual provision and management control
need to be tailored to portfolio requirements .
Constraining interdependencies require additional contractual
provisions to protect against knowledge and resource leakage.

5
Alliance
launch
Prepare to embed new alliance into alliance portfolio; conduct
assessment of facilitative and constraining inter-partner linkages.
Organize (kick-off) meetings with new and existing alliance partners
to promote inter-partner coordination and learning.

6
Alliance
management
7
Alliance
evaluation
8
Alliance
termination
FIGURE 18.2
Alliance negotiations become more complex as single - alliance
negotiation is extended with portfolio negotiations.
Focus on exploiting, facilitating and limiting constraining
interdependencies.

Focus on inter-partner knowledge practices and coordination to
stimulate inter-partner learning and relational governance.
Corrective measures may target the single-alliance as well as
inter-partner linkages.
Extend generic performance metrics with indicators capturing
portfolio processes (e.g. knowledge) and outcomes (e.g. synergy).
Metrics capture the extent to which the cost–benefits balance is
positive and to which an alliance fits with the portfolio strategy.
Assess impact alliance termination on alliance portfolio;
underperformance may suggest alliance termination, but termination
may have adverse impact on alliance portfolio.
Communicate to stakeholders; dissolution should be communicated
to all alliance partners to reduce adverse impact on alliance portfolio
performance.

Alliance development framework: alliance portfolios
Step 2: alliance partner selection
Partner ft is critical when selecting a new partner. However, frms must be aware that the
positive implications of good partner ft could be offset if that partner creates constraining
interdependencies in the alliance portfolio. For example, although a frm and a potential
partner may serve distinct markets indicative of resource complementarity, the preferred partner may possess market overlap with an existing partner in the alliance portfolio. This new
partnership is therefore likely to create conficts as the existing partner may start to decline to
Alliance portfolios
279
share resources and knowledge.A frm that wishes to be aware of such adverse consequences
asks the following questions during the partner selection phase, in addition to generic partner
selection criteria:
•
•
•
•
To what extent does a potential partner reinforce an exploration or exploitation portfolio
strategy? The frm assesses whether the intended alliance needs to be integrated in the
alliance portfolio or whether it can be considered as a stand-alone alliance.
To what extent does a potential partner create facilitating interdependencies (that is, synergy) in the alliance portfolio? The frm assesses the extent to which existing partners and
the potential partner are part of the same collaborative network, provide complementary
offerings, promote similar standards or infrastructure, are willing to learn from each other
and view the presence of other partners in the portfolio as a way to mitigate risks.
To what extent does a potential alliance partner create constraining interdependencies
(that is, conficts) in the alliance portfolio? The frm assesses the extent to which existing
partners and the potential partner are members of competing collaborative networks, are
strong rivals in an industry, promote competing technologies or infrastructures and create
confict as one alliance relationship becomes so exclusive that it prevents the frm from
working effectively with the new partner (or vice versa).
The frm compares the results of the assessments. What are the potential benefts and
costs of this potential partner from a portfolio perspective? If the benefts are higher than
the costs, the frm then proceeds with the alliance. If the costs are higher than the benefts, continuation depends on the cost–beneft analysis of the single alliance.

Step 3: alliance negotiation
During the alliance negotiation stage, negotiators seek agreement on the initial alliance conditions, including topics such as compensation, contribution and coordination. By embracing
an alliance portfolio approach, however, single-alliance negotiation strategies tend to become
more complex as a frm is confronted with multiple trade-offs (e.g. knowledge exchange
and protection) that can be resolved by using integrative and distributive negotiation strategies interchangeably. Furthermore, the negotiation bandwidth is extended as a frm’s total
value creation potential comprises the value of the single alliance and the value derived from
this single alliance’s embeddedness in the alliance portfolio. Transparency and openness are
critical as potential partners must understand that part of their value is generated through
collaboration with other alliance partners. Awareness of potential facilitating and constraining interdependencies may also affect the negotiation process and outcomes. For example,
whereas jointly identifying and discussing opportunities to create portfolio synergies creates a
constructive dialogue, attempts to resolve a partner’s conficting interests with other partners
may result in resistance, confict and tension.Therefore, alliance negotiations must centre on
both the alliance and the alliance portfolio.

Step 4: alliance design
Against the background of facilitating and constraining interdependencies, managers should
design alliances in such a way that maximizes potential portfolio synergy and minimizes additional governance costs. To this end, the generic guidelines for alliance design are extended
with guidelines that follow from an alliance portfolio approach. If an alliance is forged to
280
Alliance portfolios
support an exploration strategy, an equity-based arrangement is preferred in order to support
knowledge transfer, such that the learning from one alliance or partner can be applied to
other alliances. In contrast, if an alliance is forged to support an exploitation strategy, a nonequity-based arrangement is preferred to support fexibility. In addition, an alliance design
may include provisions that specify how and when a partner will collaborate with other partners in a frm’s portfolio. For example, there may be a clause stating the circumstances under
which partners will exchange product information and specifcations. However, constraining
interdependencies (such as competitors) will necessitate additional contractual provisions to
protect against knowledge and resource leakage. Furthermore, an alliance design may stipulate
the nature and content of knowledge management practices.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking an alliance portfolio view, generic alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be
aware of two points. First, launch managers should develop assessment activities to embed
the (new) partner(s) into the existing alliance portfolio. Assessments may focus on the extent
to which facilitative or constraining inter-partner linkages emerge. Mutual introductions
between partners may help to capitalize on facilitative linkages, whereas communication
should reduce concerns about possible competitive adversities between partners. Second, acting as the linking pin between portfolio partners, it is the launch manager’s task to clarify each
partner’s contribution as well as to create a climate in which inter-partner coordination and
mutual knowledge exchange can thrive. To accomplish these two tasks, it is critical alliance
launch managers proactively involve all partners, set up liaisons with and between partners,
and work with them to work towards the frm’s objectives.

Step 6: alliance management
During the alliance management stage, managers focus on the day-to-day operations that
enable them to realize the alliance’s value creation potential. In addition to stimulating interfrm learning, resolving conficts and initiating appropriate responses to adversities, managers must pay continuous attention to the management of inter-frm linkages. For example,
Microsoft, IBM and Oracle all provide some type of infrastructure (for example, research centres, testing facilities, training, online communities) to support knowledge exchange between
developer partners. Another critical task is to build relational capital between portfolio partners. This facilitates knowledge exchange, functions as a safeguard against misappropriation
and reduces the risk of opportunism. In addition, managers can fulfl the role of mediator if
conficts emerge between their alliance partners. Furthermore, based on performance assessment, managers may initiate modifcations in order to enhance the performance of a single
alliance as well as the portfolio.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
Defning and measuring performance objectives for a single alliance can be a challenge for
many frms. However, by adopting an alliance portfolio approach, the performance metric
system should be supplemented by metrics that capture portfolio process and outcomes. For
Alliance portfolios
281
example, it is informative to look for patterns of high or low performance across alliances,
which can expose areas of strength or weakness in the alliance portfolio. In addition, portfolio
metrics ideally capture portfolio synergies, including learning, fnancial, strategic and coordination costs pertaining to contracting, monitoring and safeguarding.A comprehensive performance metric system including milestones that allow partners to evaluate and track alliance
and portfolio performance easily enables managers to intervene immediately if expectations
are not met.

Step 8: alliance termination
An alliance portfolio approach complicates alliance termination. Consistent with generic
guidelines, under-performance of a single alliance may prompt premature termination. However, the dissolution of a single alliance may adversely impact portfolio performance, which
suggests that a termination decision should be postponed until the negative repercussions
have been resolved appropriately. For example, a partner may provide critical knowledge to
other high-performing partners. In this case, the provision of knowledge needs to be secured
before dissolving the relationship. If the termination trajectory is continued, frms need to
communicate the termination to other partners in the portfolio in a timely manner if they
are to avoid damaging their own reputations.

Summary
Driven by the proliferation and increasing diversity of alliances, frms that embrace an alliance portfolio approach often fnd themselves in a tangled web of interdependent alliances.
Whereas governance of single alliances can be challenging, governance of the partners
embedded in an alliance portfolio that encompasses multiple alliance relationships tends to
be more complex and demanding. A proactive alliance portfolio approach enables frms to
exploit interdependencies between partners and generate synergies beyond what would have
been possible through single alliances. However, these interdependencies may also constrain a
frm’s ability to create portfolio synergies as some partners are unwilling to collaborate with
other partners under certain circumstances. Firms can resolve this situation through effcient
alliance portfolio design and active portfolio management. In other words, an alliance portfolio can enhance a frm’s competitive advantage only when the portfolio design fts with the
portfolio strategy and is supported by portfolio management.

CASE: GENERAL ELECTRIC1
General Electric (GE) is a diversifed infrastructure, fnance and media company. With products and services ranging from aircraft engines and power generation to fnancial services,
healthcare solutions and television programming, GE operates in more than 100 countries
and employs more than 300,000 people worldwide. The company is also active in the energy
market. Until 2013, GE energy incorporated all business activities in one unit, but to provide
further focus, three new GE businesses were created: GE Energy Management, GE Oil &
Gas and GE Power and Water. With these businesses, GE has become one of the world’s
leading suppliers of power generation and energy delivery technologies. The businesses
282
Alliance portfolios
work together to provide integrated product and service solutions in all areas of the energy
industry, including coal, oil, natural gas and nuclear energy; renewable resources such as
water, wind, solar and biogas; and other alternative fuels. Collaboration with a variety of
partners is an important building block in GE’s long-term growth strategy. Some of GE’s alliance initiatives in recent years are outlined next.
GE energy has built on its growing technology presence in China’s thriving chemical
production industry by signing new agreements to licence its gasifcation technology to fve
Chinese companies for a variety of applications. The licence agreements grant customers
the right to utilize GE’s proprietary gasifcation technology, which converts coal and other
carbon-based fuels into synthesis gas (syngas) for use in chemical production and other
applications. GE’s gasifcation technology is one of the most widely applied technologies of
its kind in China, with more than 50 licensed facilities.
GE Energy signed a service alliance with the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA), the largest public power provider in the United States, which covers four TVA power plants and is
valued at $116 million over the next fve years. The alliance helps the TVA meet its strategic needs by ensuring the long-term reliability, effciency and cost-effective operation of its
power generation equipment. Under the agreement, GE provides a core team that offers
on-site expertise and experience at the various plant locations to help TVA manage outages
and respond quickly to specifc project requirements. In 2015, it was announced that TVA
would grant GE a contract to supply high-effciency gas turbines for a new combined-cycle
plant. This plant will replace three coal-fred units to further reduce coal emissions.
In 2010, GE signed a cooperation agreement with Norwegian energy companies Statoil
and Lyse to carry out technical and environmental feasibility studies jointly regarding the
construction of an offshore wind demonstration project in Rogaland County, off the southwest coast of Norway. The agreement includes the installation of up to four 4.0-megawatt
offshore, direct-drive wind turbines. In 2015, GE initiated a collaboration with Statoil in what
has been called the Powering Collaboration programme. This programme entails fnding
solutions to meet the global challenges that energy producers are facing, including CO2
and methane emissions and water usage. Utilizing the capabilities of both companies, the
programme aims to develop new approaches to create effcient and low-cost technologies
that can be implemented globally. Some 20 projects have already been initiated, covering a
wide portfolio of potential solutions. The partnership utilized open innovation and crowdsourcing to get access to new ideas and support the development of new technologies.
GE and Indian-based Ramky signed emergency water and industrial wastewater treatment agreements designed to address India’s industrial wastewater treatment and recycling
needs. Such water reuse initiatives can play a major role in helping improve overall water
supplies in areas where water issues are critical, such as India. The agreement involves Ramky
using GE’s industry-leading ultra-fltration (UF) and membrane bioreactor (MBR) technology
for wastewater treatment and recycling in India’s industrial sector. Ramky and GE will also
bring the innovative concept of mobile water treatment plants to the Indian water sector.
GE Energy and wind energy developer Iberwind Group SA have signed a 10-year operational and maintenance (O&M) services agreement to cover two Iberwind wind farms in
Portugal. Following a complete service agreement for the units that began in 2005, Iberwind chose to continue using GE as its preferred service provider for the next ten years.
Working closely with Iberwind, GE has customized a complete service programme that
will offer Iberwind operational and maintenance support and technology and engineering
expertise, while GE Energy will deliver parts to support corrective maintenance activities.

Alliance portfolios
283
An $18 million outsourcing agreement and facility upgrade for Yara S.p.A.’s Ferrara (Italy)
plant with industrial water treatment leader GE Oil & Gas has helped Yara meet increasing customer demands. The Ferrara plant supplies ammonia and urea liquid fertilizers to
agricultural markets. While production of these products requires large amounts of clean
water, the plant must rely on brackish, low-quality surface water sources. Yara outsourced
its Ferrara water treatment operations to GE in 2005 to reduce costs, increase reliability and
focus on its main businesses. With the recent contract expansion, GE will continue to build,
own and operate the water treatment plant with onsite GE personnel until 2020. The facility
currently produces up to 320 m3/hr of demineralized water using two proprietary GE technologies: brackish water reverse osmosis fltration (BWRO) and electro-deionization (EDI).
The partnership with Yara was further extended in 2013, when it was announced that GE
and Yara had signed a 12-year contractual service agreement to maintain an array of rotating
GE equipment at Yara’s fertilizer plant in the Netherlands.
Since 2015 GE Digital Energy is collaborating with AT&T to create the next generation of
smart energy solutions for the Industrial Internet of Things. The collaboration should result
in technology that improves the way that the energy industry works. The combination of
the GE capabilities with regard to secure wireless technologies and utility software solutions,
and the AT&T capabilities with regard to extensive connectivity, will drive development forward to a more cohesive energy network. The alliance is focusing on solution development
that can be marketed and sold to customers. This partnership builds on a global alliance
that AT&T and GE signed in 2013, which resulted in the incorporation of AT&T connectivity
technology on many GE products and solutions. In 2021, AT&T and GE announced further
collaboration on 5G connection for healthcare solutions. As part of this collaboration AT&T
will deliver both high and low-band 5G connectivity to the GE research campus, allowing
the partners to actively explore ways to use 5G connectivity to improve patient care and
outcomes.

Questions
1
2
3
Given GE Energy’s objective to build and maintain a competitive advantage in the global
energy industry (i.e. demanding exploration and exploitation strategies), what are the
important considerations in designing and improving GE Energy’s alliance portfolio?
What portfolio management initiatives can GE Energy develop to ensure inter-frm
learning and coordination between its alliance partners?
What recommendations would you ofer GE Energy with regard to alliance portfolio
development and its embeddedness in the internal organization?

Note
1 AT&T (2021); Business Wire (2011b); Capgemini (2007); Deutsch (2007); Genewsroom (2017a,
2017b), PRNewswire (2015).

19
ALLIANCE NETWORKS
The network view on alliances states that frms are embedded in a set of inter-frm linkages
between multiple parties.Whereas alliance portfolios only consider the set of direct relationships between a frm and its partners, alliance networks also involve indirect relationships: the set
of relationships between a frm and third parties intermediated by the frm’s alliance partners.
An alliance network functions as a repository of knowledge, resources and information and can
potentially enhance a frm’s competitive advantage. However, an alliance network also involves
(social) obligations, interdependencies and lock-in effects, which threaten a frm’s autonomy
and control.Therefore, from the perspective of a focal frm, an alliance network increases management complexity and coordination costs.The extent to which network benefts outweigh
costs depends on a frm’s strategic intent, its position in the alliance network and its ability to
infuence network processes and outcomes.As the opening two sections of this chapter explain,
this cost–beneft balance makes it critical to understand the nature of alliance networks, as well
as the role of a frm’s network position and how a frm can leverage its position to its advantage.
Taking the alliance network view as a reference point, the third section also presents managerial
guidelines, and the chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The meaning of an alliance network
An alliance network view comprises a frm’s direct alliances and its indirect relationships
(see Table 19.1). Whereas a direct relationship entails a single alliance between partners, an
indirect relationship connects two parties (such as frms) through a third party. For example,
a supplier alliance directly connects a manufacturer to a supplier, but the supplier can also be
indirectly connected to a manufacturer’s wholesaler if the manufacturer and the wholesaler
are connected through an alliance of their own. According to alliance network logic, despite
the lack of a formal partnership between the supplier and the wholesaler, all three frms may
possess relevant technologies, knowledge and/or expertise that could be benefcial to all of
them. Essentially, these relationships could take multiple forms, such as informal relationships
(for example, regular meetings at professional associations) and formal relationships (such as
supplier alliances). However, to stay consistent with the scope of this book, the focus here is
on alliance relationships.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-19
Alliance networks
285
TABLE 19.1 Examples of alliance networks
Focal frm
Description
Network type*
General Motors
General Motors is organized through
internal market units, each of which is
expected to have expertise in an area
related to an automotive system and
be able to sell its products on the open
market.

Internal market network with
interdependent proft centres;
compliance with frm policies and
collaborative culture.

Nike
Nike’s core competence is the design
of sport shoes and equipment. It
maintains an extensive network of
suppliers and retailers, which enables
it to reduce manufacturing costs and
respond fexibly to customer demands.

Vertical market network with
independent organizations;
upstream suppliers and downstream
distributors around one company
(integrator).

Toshiba
Toshiba is a diversifed manufacturer
and marketer consisting of more
than 200 companies, 600 ‘grandchild’
companies and numerous direct and
indirect exchange relationships across
markets, products and countries.

Inter-market network with
independent organizations;
institutionalized affliation among
frms in unrelated industries and
linked in vertical direct and indirect
relationships.

Tata Group
The Tata Group is a conglomerate
operating in a wide range of
industries, such as consumer products,
steel, fnancial services and is
embedded in a large network of direct
and indirect exchange relationships.

Opportunity network with
independent organizations; organized
around a central broker and temporal
productions and services to execute
particular projects.

Note: * Taking a focal frm as reference point, frms can participate in different types of alliance networks.
Source: Achrol (1997).

An alliance network can enhance a frm’s competitive advantage as its set of direct relationships provides access to a pool of resources that might not otherwise be easily available (Gulati
1998), including fnancial capital, research and development facilities and human resources.The
network also functions as a source of valuable information through its indirect relationships by
means of referrals, contacts and knowledge and reputational spillovers (Baum et al. 2000). Firms
can use this access to resources and information to compete more effectively, to access markets
with high entry barriers, to lower their reliance on others, to create innovative products and
services, to realize economies of scale and scope and to obtain legitimization. An alliance network also provides a frm with strategic manoeuvrability (Powell 1990). It represents a more
effcient form of governance than hierarchies and markets, particularly in uncertain and competitive environments, as it allows a frm to be more fexible and enhance its control over external parties. For example, an alliance network enriches a frm’s repertoire of strategic actions as it
provides managers with greater access to industrial intelligence and other types of information
than they would generate operating autonomously. Moreover, an alliance network reduces
behavioural uncertainty concerning a frm’s network partners.Although not all network partners are formally connected through an alliance, the presence of indirect relationships may
promote solidarity and collective norms regarding how to operate within an alliance network.

286
Alliance networks
However, alliance networks also present frms with risks and hazards (Gulati and Gargiulo
1999). First, the exchange of resources, information and knowledge in an alliance network
often entails obligations for future transactions as network members may expect receiving
frms to reciprocate their efforts. Expected obligations from network partners, as well as the
resulting costs for switching to other partners, could cause a frm to be locked-in, which
hinders the frm’s strategic manoeuvrability. Second, an alliance network creates interdependencies between network members, which reduces their autonomy and therefore constrains
their decision making. A frm whose partners have extensive control of key resources cannot exclude those partners from its alliance network without jeopardizing access to those
resources; this is a resource constraint that enhances the partners’ power over the frm. As
other parties in an alliance network obtain more power, concerns also arise over the extent to
which value is equally and equitably distributed.Third, frms that are not part of the core of
an alliance network may not receive new information or may receive it too late and may be
subject to blind-spot biases. For example, when technological changes occur frequently in an
industry, access to new and/or different types of information becomes critical. Consequently,
frms that are disconnected from the alliance network are at a considerable disadvantage.
In summary, an alliance network can provide a frm with substantial benefts. However, it
also brings a degree of managerial complexity that extends beyond the governance of single alliances and alliance portfolios. The challenge for one frm participating in an alliance
network is to capture network benefts while curbing the negative implications of alliance
networks. This requires a holistic approach that encompasses an understanding of the effectiveness of a frm’s position in an alliance network and the degree to which a frm can exercise
infuence over network processes and outcomes.

Alliance network governance
The governance of alliance networks (from a focal frm perspective) is more complex than
the governance of single alliances and alliance portfolios, owing to the greater number of
direct and indirect relationships to be considered. With regard to alliance formation, studies
have shown that new alliance formation is not only infuenced by frm- and alliance-level
factors (e.g. resource motives and partner ft) but also by repeated experiences with the same
alliance partners (Gulati 1995a). For example, Ghosh and colleagues (2016) demonstrate that
new alliances may be predicted by both the technical, geographic and product-market ft of
potential partners as well as by prior ties between partners, but only when these industries
are less mature. Nevertheless, as with alliance portfolio governance, frms can control their
network position in light of their network strategy and initiate corrective actions by creating, changing and maintaining their set of alliances (see Table 19.2). Hence, we next discuss
network position and management.

Alliance network position
A frm’s network position refers to the number and pattern of structural linkages between a
frm and other parties in a network (Gulati and Gargiulo 1999). Prior studies have assessed
a frm’s network position by focusing on the structural confguration of an alliance network;
their key argument was that a frm’s position infuences its resources and information availability, as well as how much control a frm has over resource fows in the network (Yli-Renko and
Autio 1998).An alliance network view extends beyond an alliance portfolio view (also referred
Alliance networks
287
TABLE 19.2 Alliance network governance
Network position
Network management
Objective
Achieve a position in the alliance
network in support of a frm’s strategic
intent.

Capitalize on network position and
execute network functions and roles.

Approach
Support exploration intent with a
closure position; support exploitation
intent with a structural hole position;
or reconcile strategic intents via
temporal separation, structural
separation or parallel confguration.

Engage in framing, activating, mobilizing
and/or synthesizing functions supported
by network management roles, including
information-broker, coordinator,
relationship broker and network
structuring agent.

Concern
Trade-off between strengths and
weaknesses of network position.

Trade-off between costs and benefts of
network management.

Sources: Burt (1982); Coleman (1990); Jarvensivu and Moller (2009).

to as an egocentric alliance network) by encompassing indirect relationships. Consequently,
the alliance portfolio design parameters can be extended to include indirect relationships in
order to explain the relationship between a frm’s network position and its performance.
The size dimension pertains to the boundary of the alliance network. Academic studies
often set this boundary arbitrarily, which implies that their results need to be interpreted with
caution (Scott 2000). The key advantage of larger networks is that they tend to improve a
frm’s innovative performance as partners within an alliance network can align resources and
information more easily, while created knowledge becomes more easily available to all partners. However, it is also more diffcult for a frm to infuence resource and information fows
in a larger network because of its greater complexity.The partner dimension pertains to partner characteristics within the alliance network, including the partner’s industries, functional
orientation and countries of origin.The greater the partner diversity in an alliance network
(e.g. different kinds of resources, information, technologies, etc.), the better the access a frm
generates to more sources of critical resources (Yli-Renko and Autio 1998). However, indirect relationships mean that frms have less control over the adverse impact of constraining
interdependencies, or are less able to leverage facilitating interdependencies than they would
be in an alliance portfolio.The governance (or relational) dimension pertains to the strength
of the relationship (Granovetter 1973). From an alliance network point of view, strong ties
(e.g. equity-based) suggest that a frm is embedded in a web of highly integrated direct and
indirect relationships. The reciprocal nature of these relationships means that information
fows easily through the alliance network. However, whereas partners may initially supply
novel information, their contributions may become known over time, thereby reducing the
benefts of strong ties. In contrast, weak ties (e.g. non-equity-based) suggest that a frm is
connected loosely to the other frms in the alliance network. Although the distribution of
information is less predictable, weak ties are better suited to the rapid diffusion of new ideas
between a variety of parties. The structural dimension pertains to the level of redundancy
(that is, overlap) between direct and indirect relationships within an alliance network.To capture redundancy in an alliance network, multiple parameters have been identifed. However, it
is beyond the scope of this book to discuss them all; therefore, the two prominent parameters
in the alliance network literature that are discussed are (1) density and (2) centrality.

288
Alliance networks
Network density (or closure) refers to the extent to which frms in an alliance network are
directly connected as opposed to being connected through a series of indirect relationships
(Coleman 1990). Density tends to make inter-party interactions observable to others because
those parties have known and common contacts, which increases their willingness to share
information freely amongst each other. Firms participating in a dense alliance network can
rely on relational norms to promote collaboration and social sanctions (that is, negative reputation) to reduce opportunism. Consequently, network density enhances a frm’s performance
because it reduces monitoring costs, spreads risk and encourages collective risk-taking. It also
enhances reputation, facilitates rapid dissemination of information, improves direct access
to resources and facilitates collaboration between network members. However, the fact that
partners in the network have similar expectations means that a dense network also decreases a
frm’s fexibility. For example, social obligations and operating rules may constrain a frm from
forging new alliances outside the network.
Network centrality is the relative proximity of frms to the core of the alliance network’s
inter-frm linkages (Coleman 1990) and is regarded as a measure of network power.A central
position in a network is a strategic location because it enables a frm to exercise infuence over
resource fows and the diffusion of information. For example, obtaining some control over
network processes and outcomes provides a frm with preferential access to resources, such as
market information, customer information and technological developments. A case in point
is Super Bakery, a food service broker that maintains control over its order-flling cycle, not
by direct supervision of the work of the contractors but by maintaining control over communication with its customers and serving as a communications and coordination centre for the
contractors (Williams 2005). Consequently, network centrality enhances a frm’s performance
because it provides a frm with control over resource and information fows.
When the network dimensions are considered together, it follows that a frm can occupy
different network positions, each of which enables the frm to acquire different types of network benefts (Ahuja 2000). This heterogeneity in various network positions also indicates
that a network position is only benefcial to a frm when it is aligned with the frm’s strategy.
The next section draws on two prominent views on alliance networks, those of Burt (1982)
and Coleman (1990), to present two prototypical network positions that, respectively, support
a frm’s exploitation and exploration intents (see Figure 19.1).
In terms of a frm’s exploitation intent, favourable outcomes (that is, performance) stem
from occupying a structural hole position in an alliance network that is characterized by
centrality, relatively few strong direct and indirect relationships, non-redundant relationships
and partner homogeneity.A structural hole position suggests that a frm functions as a broker
between two otherwise disconnected groups of intertwined parties. Although the two disconnected groups that are connected by a broker are not necessarily unaware of one another,
information, resources and knowledge are exchanged through the intermediate frm. Because
different information fows within each group, a broker frm has the opportunity to control
exchanges between the groups providing it with informational advantages. For example, brokers have the advantage of being able to bring together disconnected frms, which provides
them with an opportunity to determine whose interests are served and when contact is
established.The structural hole position is best suited to an exploitation strategy as it enables
a frm to organize the fow of resources in an effcient manner. That is, a broker’s function
in an alliance network supports the exploitation of existing resource endowments to reduce
variety, increase stability and enhance performance. For ease of coordination, a frm will also
preferably occupy a prominent position in the centre of the alliance network.

Alliance networks
Closure network with
exploration orientation
weak tie
FIGURE 19.1
strong tie
289
Structural hole network with
exploitation orientation
focal firm
Actor type A
Actor type B
Actor type C
Alliance network confgurations
In terms of a frm’s exploration intent, favourable outcomes (that is, innovation) stem from
the frm’s closure position in an alliance network that is characterized by density, multiple
weak direct and indirect relationships, redundant relationships and a high diversity of partners.
Closure suggests that a frm is embedded in a network of highly coupled, yet loosely coupled,
interconnected parties. Closure provides a frm with informational advantages as it possesses
access to multiple sources increasing reliability, timing and early acquisition of information. In
addition, network parties tend to interact based on a set of relational norms, which stimulates
collaborative behaviour. These network characteristics best suit an exploration strategy. This
is because a frm in a network position that is loosely connected to a variety of parties with
diverse organizational backgrounds and resources is well positioned to develop new knowledge, see new opportunities and create those capabilities necessary for survival. Furthermore,
the rapid diffusion of information in closure networks, and diversity in the cognitive focus
of network partners, reinforces innovation. The openness in a closure network also reduces
the risk of uneven distribution of network outcomes. For example, closure offers protection
against misappropriation because a frm and its counterparts are better able to act together
against a party that violates relational norms and conduct.
The closure and structural hole positions depict two prototypical network positions. As
exploitation and exploration can be considered opposing strategies, a frm may seek to obtain
either a closure or structural hole position. However, high-performing frms tend to reconcile
exploration and exploitation intents, which requires them to adjust their network position
accordingly. Despite the absence of any universal prescriptions, the following three implications can be offered, building on the logic that the optimal network position of a frm is
contingent on its strategic intent:
•
A frm may alternate between exploration and exploitation intents over time, suggesting that its network position also needs to be adapted. A focus on exploration requires
290
•
•
Alliance networks
a closure network to obtain informational benefts, whereas a focus on exploitation
requires a structural hole network to obtain resource benefts. By entering and exiting
alliances, a frm can change its network position over time in accordance with its strategic
focus.
A frm may seek to realize its exploration and exploitation intents concurrently, suggesting that its network position needs to accommodate both strategic intents at the
same time.Although the closure and the structural hole views on alliance networks have
opposing implications, a frm may attempt to confgure a position that combines both
perspectives.
A frm may accommodate both strategic intents by separating the organization into two
‘parts’, each of which pursues its own strategy. For example, by dividing research and
development and production into two different business units, the R&D business unit
with a focus on exploration may beneft from a closure position, whereas the production
business unit with a focus on exploitation may beneft from a structural hole position.

Network management
Firms engage in network management in order to attain and support their position in an
alliance network (McGuire 2002). Network management involves restructuring the existing
network and improving the conditions of cooperation within the existing structure.Whereas
restructuring involves adding or removing alliances, improving the conditions of cooperation involves various network activities to facilitate cooperation between network partners.
However, there is a degree of controversy regarding the extent to which alliance networks can
be intentionally managed (Jarvensivu and Moller 2009). On one hand, building on the logic
that alliance networks constitute a source of a frm’s competitive advantage, one view suggests
that frms can and should manage an alliance network actively and purposefully. On the other
hand, another view indicates that, from a focal frm’s perspective, alliance networks are surrounded by uncertainty as frms cannot manage the behaviour of other parties in the network.
The position of this book is that although frms can manage their direct alliance relationships
and their alliance portfolios, they can at best, and only to a certain degree, infuence network
processes and outcomes. To realize network management, we suggest that a frm must fulfl
the four functions described later and take on associated network management roles (Jarvensivu and Moller 2009; Knight and Harland 2005).
Framing entails a frm’s attempts to infuence the roles that each participant may play at
any given time and perceptions about the common purpose of the alliance network. Separate missions, distinct constituencies and competition for resources in alliance networks
make it increasingly diffcult to achieve some form of overall coordination. A frm may set
an agenda and develop initiatives to support joint value creation in an alliance network. Its
task is then to create awareness about the agenda and plans among key participants within
the alliance network. In order for parties to collaborate and not compete, they should recognize the complementarity of their needs and have mutually understood defnitions of
the issues to be addressed.To this end, a frm may adopt the role of an information broker,
which means that it gathers, analyzes and disseminates information to various parties in
the network; sometimes this is in response to a request, but it is usually done proactively.
A frm may seek to establish an identity and culture for the alliance network, even if it is
temporary. Collective sense making helps to develop a working structure for the network
Alliance networks
291
and aligns the perceptions of participants without mechanisms based on authority relations. An alliance network does not need to have completely aligned goals in order to
create value, but a certain level of shared planning is required among at least some of the
networked actors. If actors believe that they can achieve greater value as network members,
then they may be willing to share part of their autonomy to the network and operate like
a quasi-organization.
Activating involves identifying potential network participants and assessing the extent to
which their skills, knowledge and resources improve network performance. It also includes
the process of structuring the alliance network. Building on the overall network objectives,
required partners, resources and activities are identifed and an attempt is made to install
some form of coordination. For example, a frm may fulfl a coordinator role and engage
in activities such as facilitating inter-partner activities, bringing together representatives of
the different frms and facilitating communication and other network practices. A frm can
organize meetings between all relevant network participants in order to align perceptions and
strengthen linkages. Coordination in alliance networks is maintained increasingly through
informal open-ended contracts rather than hierarchical control and authority.Thus, the interactions between network members are neither random nor uniform but patterned so that
they engage in a complicated dance of mutual alignment and adjustment.
Mobilizing involves building commitment among parties in an alliance network to carry
out the necessary activities.This is a common and ongoing task for achieving network outcomes. A frm may fulfl the role of advisor, which involves advising parties in the network
on various topics, such as policies and alliance activities. In addition, a frm may act as a relationship broker, attempting to initiate and facilitate new alliances between different parties in
order to create new opportunities, and, if needed, it may mediate in conficts. In addition, a
frm acting as an innovation sponsor tries to mobilize organizations in the network to innovate, with the goal of motivating and stimulating parties to recognize new opportunities for
innovation and facilitate potential alliances.
Synthesizing relates to organizing and controlling, and it involves creating conditions for
productive interaction while preventing, minimizing and removing obstacles to collaboration.The activities are carried out so as to produce effective and effcient network outcomes
vis-à-vis expectations. If this does not occur, corrective measures are taken to improve the
alliance network. Synthesizing entails facilitating and furthering interaction, facilitating linkages among participants and reducing complexity and uncertainty by promoting information
exchange. For example, a frm may fulfl the role of a network-structuring agent, which
monitors and infuences the structure of alliance relationships. In this role, a frm may focus
on such areas as restructuring the alliance network by initiating new alliances, seeking ways
to reduce the costs of resource exchange and enforcing protection mechanisms against misappropriation. The objective is to achieve cooperation among actors while minimizing and
removing informational and interactional blockages to the cooperation.This steering of network processes is inherently diffcult in that the result of the network process is derived from
the interaction between the strategies of all actors involved.
The way in which a frm can fulfl these management functions depends partially on the
intent and structural confguration of an alliance network (Jarvensivu and Moller 2009). First,
while some alliance networks are based on more emergent cooperation, others are based on a
more deliberately set strategic intent. In emergent alliance networks, management tasks tend
to be characterized by ongoing negotiation and renegotiation, adaptation and re-adaptation.

292
Alliance networks
In contrast, alliance networks with a few strong players are more likely to set clear strategies based on the strategy of these players, which means that coordination is more likely
to be imposed on other network participants. Second, the distribution of power in an alliance network (that is, centrality) impacts a frm’s ability to infuence network processes and
outcomes. As a frm occupies a central position in an alliance network, it may adopt a more
power-driven, hierarchical-type managing style. In contrast, a frm with low centrality must
adopt more subtle negotiation approaches.Third, the density of inter-partner linkages affects
how well network participants are able to make sense of the current, potential and future
partners in their alliance network. High density suggests that network partners frequently
interact, which requires less managerial effort to negotiate the framing of the network and
allows efforts to focus on activating, mobilizing and synthesizing the network. In contrast, low
density indicates that network partners are more distant, which demands more effort to align
parties’ perceptions and interests.
To conclude, extending beyond (formal) network management functions, networks may
also be governed through social mechanisms (Capaldo 2014). Such mechanisms refer to governance efforts that support coordination of economic action across partnered organizations.
Generally, a distinction can be made between relational mechanisms, such as interpersonal
relationships, inter-organizational trust, and reciprocity and structural mechanisms, including
restricted access, collective sanctions and reputation concerns. Both types of social mechanisms infuence partners’ behaviour and sustain inter-organizational coordination in alliance
networks. Alliance networks can thus provide frms with knowledge resources that enhance
the frms’ ability to compete. However, in order to exploit the potential for competitive
advantage embodied in inter-organizational collaboration, the processes of network governance need to be carefully managed.Therefore it is important to diagnose and intervene in the
formal functions and social mechanisms affecting the behaviour of the partners in the alliance
network.

Network dynamics
Studies have investigated how alliance networks develop over time. Traditionally, studies
adopted static approaches and assumed that the informational and resource value of an alliance network remains constant over time or evolves from carrying low value to progressively
higher value (Gilsing et al. 2016). Despite inconclusive evidence on the evolutionary path—
from closure to structural hole or vice versa—early studies adopt the (implicit) assumption
of a linear process of network evolution. Akin to alliance portfolio dynamics, however, more
recently, by investigating network evolution along development phases of birth, growth and
maturation, new insights into network dynamics have been generated. Lipparini et al. (2014)
show that core frms took charge of the processes of inter-frm learning from frms to dyads,
and from dyads to networks, and of knowledge-enhancing practices all needed to nurture the
transfer, recombination and creation of specialized knowledge. Gilsing and colleagues (2016)
show that the evolution of both structural and positional embeddedness strongly exhibits
nonlinearity by resembling a fuctuating pattern that is induced by changes in technological
uncertainty. Networks evolve from an initially low level of structural and positional embeddedness to a progressively higher level, through patterns of network expansion and network
strengthening, though with different structural and positional confgurations. Despite these
insights, understanding how alliance networks evolve is at an embryonic stage, thus requiring
more (empirical) research (Agostini and Nosella 2019).

Alliance networks
293
Alliance network: decision-making steps
Many frms are unaware of their network positions, let alone the fact that they engage intentionally in network management activities. In contrast, high-performing frms tend to recognize the importance of their alliance networks and consider the formation and management
of single alliances in the context of the entire alliance network.Their holistic visualization of
the alliance network broadens their range of strategic actions.This section connects the stages
of the alliance development framework to an alliance network view (see Figure 19.2) in order
to provide insights into the effcient governance of single alliances in an alliance network.

1
Alliance strategy
formulation
2
Alliance partner
selection
3
Alliance
negotiation
FIGURE 19.2
Assess the extent to which a governance mode contributes to
achieving alignment between a firm’s strategic intent and its network
position; mergers and alliances cause shift in network position.
Leverage network position to identify new alliance opportunities (or if
applicable, merger and acquisition opportunities).
Leverage alliance network to identify potential alliance partners.
Extend partner selection analysis with criteria, including partner’s
position in the alliance network, reputation, prominence, likelihood
of knowledge spill-over and homogeneous or heterogeneous partner.
Consider the configuration of the alliance network and a firm’s
network position in choosing negotiation approach (e.g. network
operating rules).
Network-based negotiations are complex, as the outcomes of singlealliance negotiations could strengthen or weaken a firm’s network
position.

4
Alliance
design
Design decisions are influenced by the actual and desired network
position: non-equity and equity-based arrangements may.
create/reinforce closure and structural hole positions; relational
embeddedness reduces need for equity-based arrangements.

5
Alliance
launch
Analyze alliance network challenges, risks and opportunities for the
alliance and your organization.
Organize (kick-off) meetings with new alliance partners to identity
actor responses in the alliance network and develop joint responses.

6
Alliance
management
Alliance management should focus on the single alliance as well as
maintaining or improving a firm’s network position.
Manage boundary spanning roles and use the alliance as a vehicle to
execute the firm’s network functions and roles.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic metrics with network indicators capturing network
processes (e.g. communication) and outcomes (e.g. referral).
Metrics capture the extent to which the cost–benefits balance is
positive and to which an alliance fits with the network strategy.

8
Alliance
termination
Assess the impact of alliance termination on network position.
Dissolution should be communicated to all alliance partners, as well
as to alliance network to create openness and to comply with
relational norms and network operating rules.

Alliance development framework: alliance networks
294
Alliance networks
Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
The decision to establish an alliance is not only infuenced by strategic, resource-led and
economic imperatives but also by how a frm is embedded in an alliance network. In addition to generic guidelines, a governance mode decision should thus also incorporate the
extent to which certain governance modes help to align a frm’s strategic intent to its network position. Where market exchange and internal development are unlikely to affect a
frm’s network position, mergers and acquisitions and alliances may. For example, merging
with a prominent party in the alliance network may enhance a frm’s centrality, whereas
acquiring a competitor may create a structural hole position. Similarly, entering (or exiting)
an alliance causes a shift in a frm’s network position from closure to structural hole and
vice versa.
In addition, the frm’s position in an alliance network either helps or hinders its identifcation of new opportunities. For example, through its indirect relationships, a frm receives
information about potential alliance partners (or merger and acquisition targets), which may
affect its ability to forge viable alliances. A network position may also constrain the extent
to which potential partners are aware of potential partner frms, thereby limiting its set of
choices. For example, informational advantages tend to enable frms with more central and
prominent network positions to establish more new alliances and to do so with greater
frequency. As the available information grows, frms seeking to forge alliances become less
reliant on external conditions and more infuenced by the alliance network in which they
are embedded.

Step 2: alliance partner selection
An alliance network can reduce what it costs a frm to fnd and select partners. Through
indirect relationships, an alliance network may provide a frm with information about the
availability and reliability of potential partners. Moreover, alliance network partners may
have a certain status and reputation, which makes them more attractive as partners. Specifcally, status and reputation are critical in uncertain environments because they signal
that a potential partner has valuable resources and unique skills and is able to maintain
alliance relationships successfully. An alliance network also provides information about the
predictability of a potential partner’s behaviour. Prior successful experiences with other
alliance partners may increase a partner’s trustworthiness, which is disseminated in an alliance network through referrals.Within an alliance network, frms with prior alliances tend
to forge new alliances with the same partner. The alliance partners have established prior
working relationships, are aware of their skills and needs and are therefore more likely to
realize high performance levels. In addition, unconnected frms are more likely to ally if
they have common partners or are closer in an alliance network. Thus, a frm that leverages its alliance networks actively may reduce costs related to partner search, selection and
monitoring. However, a frm may wish to consider the following questions when selecting
a partner:
•
•
•
To what extent does a potential partner enhance or undermine the network position?
To what extent does a potential partner change the power position of a frm?
To what extent do network-operating rules tolerate an alliance partner outside the existing alliance network?

Alliance networks
295
Step 3: alliance negotiation
When taking an alliance network view, generic alliance negotiation guidelines are suffcient
to realize favourable negotiation processes and outcomes. However, negotiators should be
aware of two points. First, when starting alliance negotiations with a partner that is embedded
in a frm’s alliance network, a negotiator should be aware that the alliance network itself might
function as a safeguard against unbalanced negotiation outcomes. If the partners have a history
of shared experiences, negotiations are more likely to be characterized by integrative negotiation strategies. In addition, to avoid negative reputational spillovers, negotiations are more
likely to occur in a collaborative climate. Second, single-alliance negotiations tend to become
more complex when the alliance network view is incorporated.The negotiation bandwidth
becomes extended as a frm’s value creation potential comprises the value of the single alliance and the value of the single alliance within the alliance network. Awareness of potential
network contributions and constraints may affect negotiation processes and outcomes. For
example, while identifying and discussing opportunities to create a joint business proposition
generates constructive interactions, attempts to resolve opposing interests within the alliance
network may result in resistance, conficts and tensions. In addition, when network-level decisions are part of the negotiation, multi-lateral negotiations (that is, multiple partners) require
a careful negotiation approach.

Step 4: alliance design
Firms tend to approach alliances as stand-alone transactions, which means that they often
neglect the infuence of a frm’s alliance network on alliance design decisions.That is, a frm
changes the confguration of the alliance network through alliance design decisions.Whereas
partner selection constitutes a critical decision as it affects the homogeneity or heterogeneity
of partner diversity, the adopted governance form affects the strength of the tie and thus the
network position. For example, forging a non-equity-based learning alliance with a university
may strengthen a closure position, whereas establishing a joint venture with a supplier may
reinforce a structural hole position.
An important implication of relational embeddedness in an alliance network is the
enhanced relational capital between frms. Relational capital promotes collaborative behaviour and increases a partner’s awareness that the other has a lot to lose from behaving opportunistically. Social sanctions extend beyond the alliance and may include loss of reputation,
loss of business with the alliance partner and deteriorated relationships with other network
partners. Consequently, rather than relying on equity-based arrangements and complete contracts, frms may opt for self-enforcing safeguards, which mitigates the risk of opportunism,
misappropriation and unpredictable partner behaviour. In other words, familiarity between
alliance partners generates relational capital, which enables the partners to use less quasihierarchical structures (i.e. non-equity) in the design of the partnership.

Step 5: alliance launch
During the alliance launch stage, the partner frms transition from alliance formation to preparing and implementing the alliance contract. Organizing alliance execution is pivotal with
regard to the frm’s alliance network.With the formation of a new alliance, a frm’s network
position may change (substantially). Launch managers should make detailed assessment on
296
Alliance networks
how the frm’s position changes and what initiatives are required to curb adversities and
leverage synergies. For example, a new alliance may create a linkage through which a frm
obtains access to previously unattainable knowledge sources, or it may become part of a
referral network. In contrast, new alliance relationships in a network may violate implicit
behavioural rules, thus necessitating corrective actions. In addition, the launch of a new alliance may provide the launch manager with an opportunity to assemble existing partners.
Together they may discuss actions to act upon new network opportunities and formulate
joint responses to network actors’ (defensive/offensive) responses to the alliance announcement. To accomplish these tasks, it is critical alliance launch managers adopt a helicopter
view, thus understanding how their actions may have repercussions extending beyond narrow
organizational boundaries.

Step 6: alliance management
When frms embrace a proactive approach towards alliance network management, the management of a single alliance extends beyond regular activities, which include building relational norms and capital, initiating corrective measures, resolving conficts and stimulating
inter-frm learning. More specifcally, boundary-spanning individuals become critical as they
have a crucial impact on information exchange and decision making in their own organization and that of their counterparts. Building on the groundwork laid by the launch managers, alliance management may focus on boundary-spanning agents to enhance information
exchange and obtain control over network benefts (such as referrals). In addition, management may focus on the role the alliance plays in fulflling its network management efforts.
Examples of such roles include the following:
•
•
•
•
An information-broker role (framing) in the network: a frm uses the alliance as a vehicle
to disseminate information to various parties in the network.
A coordinator role (activating): a frm uses the alliance as a vehicle to bring together
representatives of the different frms in the alliance network.
A relationship broker or innovation role (mobilizing): a frm may use the alliance as a
vehicle to initiate and facilitate new alliances between different parties.
A network structuring agent role (synthesizing): a frm uses the alliance as a vehicle to
monitor and infuence the structure of relationships in the alliance network.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
By adopting an alliance network view, the performance metric system should be supplemented by metrics that capture alliance network processes and outcomes. Network processes
can be captured through metrics that measure the extent to which information is exchanged
within the alliance network. Examples could include the number and quality of referrals and
contacts an alliance partner provides. In addition, alliance network metrics may capture outcomes associated with the direct relationship, such as the extent to which an alliance generates
knowledge, and outcomes associated with indirect relationships, such as the extent to which
third-party resources have been used. Metrics should also capture the network maintenance
costs imposed on a frm. A comprehensive performance metric system enables a frm to
evaluate and track alliance and network performance, and, if necessary, it can intervene immediately if expectations are not met.

Alliance networks
297
Step 8: alliance termination
From an alliance network view, an alliance termination decision becomes more complex.
Consistent with generic guidelines, the under-performance of a single alliance may prompt
a premature termination. However, because the dissolution of a single alliance may adversely
impact a frm’s network positions, any decision to dissolve the alliance should perhaps be
postponed until the negative repercussions are resolved. For example, a frm’s alliance partner
may be connected to a prominent network partner, and terminating the partnership may have
serious negative knowledge and reputational spillovers. If a termination trajectory is continued, a frm must communicate this decision to other partners in the network in a timely
manner. If exiting an alliance violates the relational norms established in an alliance network,
a frm’s relational capital may be seriously damaged unless it can provide an explanation.

Summary
A network view on alliances states that frms are embedded in a set of inter-frm linkages
between multiple parties. The functions of an alliance network can potentially enhance a
frm’s competitive advantage by providing resource advantages through direct relationships
and information advantages through indirect relationships. However, an alliance network also
increases management complexity and coordination costs because it imposes (social) obligations, interdependencies and lock-in effects on a frm. Although we have questioned the
extent to which a single frm can manage its alliance networks, such networks can enhance a
frm’s performance when its network position is aligned with its strategic intent. In general,
a closure network enables a frm to realize its exploration objectives, whereas a structural
hole network favours exploitation objectives. Furthermore, a frm can fulfl different network
functions and roles to support an alliance network. As frms can restructure their network
position by means of entering and exiting alliances, this chapter has also discussed how an
alliance network view impacts the formation and management of single alliances.

CASE: IBM1
International Business Machines (IBM) is a multinational US technology and consulting frm.
It manufactures and sells computer hardware and software and offers infrastructure, hosting and consulting services in areas ranging from mainframe computers to nanotechnology. Throughout its history, IBM has operated at the forefront of computing technology.
In the 1930s, IBM’s tabulating equipment enabled its customers to process unprecedented
amounts of data. In the 1950s and 1960s, IBM developed self-learning programmes to play
draughts (IBM 704). It also developed FORTRAN, a scientifc programming language, and
built a reservation system for American Airlines called SABRE. IBM’s computing power even
helped NASA track space fights and provided support to the NASA moon missions. In 1973,
IBM developed the Universal Product Code, also known as the barcode, which can still be
found on virtually every product in the world. The development of mainframe computing,
which allowed businesses to upgrade their computing power and run more sophisticated
applications, proved pivotal to IBM’s performance. IBM was able to build a strong and virtually unchallenged competitive position, primarily due to its innovative capacity, its focus on
process optimization and its control over the supply chain.

298
Alliance networks
Due to its internal focus, IBM failed to recognize the change in the markets in the 1980s.
One critical threat to IBM’s position was the partnership between Sun and Hewlett Packard,
which developed an alternative operating system called UNIX; this was the frst real alternative to IBM’s mainframe operating systems. The public started to become interested in personal computers, and, despite IBM’s conviction that mainframes would remain the primary
source of computing power for business and enterprises, the company entered the ‘microcomputer’ market in 1981. IBM did not enter the PC market using its standard vertically
integrated approach; instead, it used external sources to provide components and operating
software that ft IBM requirements. However, due to their open architecture, Intel and Microsoft were able to achieve market dominance. In addition, Intel and Microsoft both supplied
new hardware manufacturers like Fujitsu and Compaq in the early 1990s. In addition, in
response to increasing complexity, customers were looking for system integration, which
was an indication that the IT market was about to change from being technology-oriented
to service-oriented. IBM’s once comfortable competitive position was fading rapidly. This
required IBM to change its internal focus and adopt an external focus.
In 1991/1992, IBM forged a total of 55 alliances, 23 of which focused on further developing its operating system and another 23 of which focused on improving its microprocessor
technology. In addition, 42 of the 55 alliances were related to research and development
activities, whereas nine partnerships involved joint ventures and research consortia. An
example was IBM’s long-term alliance with Intel to develop microprocessors and its collaboration with Microsoft to cross-license Windows New Technology. IBM also developed
software for third parties, including a fight reservation system and CAD/CAM applications.
IBM was also engaged in ten alliances with Apple, primarily aimed at developing microprocessors and software architecture. These bilateral partnerships enabled IBM to advance its
existing technologies. However, to remain competitive, IBM had to discover new markets
and technologies.
From 1996 onwards, IBM engaged increasingly in multi-partner collaboration, the objectives of which changed from further development of existing technologies to development
of new areas of expertise. For example, the pioneering work of the IBM Internet group was
reinforced by its partnering strategies. An initial joint venture with parties such as Netscape
and Oracle to develop internet browsing software was followed by the introduction of various internet-related products (such as ThinkPad), which were generated through IBM’s alliance network. The relatively strong market position that IBM established in 2000 resulted
from alliances in the telecom and ICT consultancy industries. By the end of the 1990s, IBM
had transformed itself from a hardware manufacturer to a global service provider by changing its internal organizations.
During the frst years of the new millennium, IBM further intensifed its focus on software development and service provision. Whereas alliances with hardware manufacturers
Motorola and Sun had enabled IBM to exploit existing technologies, partnerships with
Microsoft, PeopleSoft and Citrix enabled IBM to explore a wide variety of software development projects. IBM also explored the telecommunications industry through network
developers and phone manufacturers, such as Cisco and Nokia. IBM has also released code
under various open-source licences, such as the platform-independent software framework Eclipse, the three-sentence International Components for Unicode (ICU) licence and
the Java-based relational database management system (RDBMS) Apache Derby. By 2001,
IBM’s revenue stream from its global services outstripped its traditional revenue stream
from hardware.

Alliance networks
299
Following these successes, IBM continued its network-based service strategy. For example, IBM sold its hardware division to Lenovo in 2005 but forged a multi-year agreement
whereby Lenovo is the leading provider of personal computers to IBM clients, and IBM
provides fnancing and end-user support services for those PC solutions. Building on this
success, the agreement was expanded into a global alliance to develop and deliver industryspecifc, integrated technology solutions for enterprises, small- and mid-market businesses
and individuals. In addition, virtually all of the latest-generation console gaming systems
use microprocessors developed by IBM. The Xbox 360 contains a PowerPC tri-core processor, which IBM designed and produced in less than 24 months. In 2014, IBM sold its chipmanufacturing business to GlobalFoundries. GlobalFoundries will be the sole provider of
IBM’s server processor chips until 2025.
Currently, IBM is focusing on cloud computing, cognitive computing, Internet of Things,
Big Data and other business domains. In these businesses, the reliance on a broad alliance
network remains vital to provide breakthrough innovations. In 2022, IBM forged a partnership with Sierra Space on the Next Generation of Space Technology and Software Platforms.
IBM’s platform facilitates Sierra Space’s efforts for automating business operations to achieve
better performance, automate IT operations to deliver actionable insights, automate application and data fows to improve client experiences, automate networks to deliver zero-touch
operations and generate deeper insights into threats, orchestration actions and automatic
responses. IBM also teamed up with VMware, providing clients new ways to modernize
hybrid cloud environments in regulated industries. Their intention is to develop and market
jointly engineered IBM and VMware Cloud solutions. This will help clients in regulated industries such as fnancial services, healthcare and the public sector address the cost, complexity and risk of migrating and modernizing mission-critical workloads in the cloud. Building
on a long-standing relationship, in 2022, IBM initiated one of the world’s largest corporate
transformation projects based on SAP® ERP software, designed to fuel the company’s growth
and better support its clients. The SAP arrangement will enable IBM to accelerate its business
transformation in the cloud and fuel its future growth. Following the introduction of different partnerships in the feld of hybrid cloud computing, IBM also has announced different
partnerships in the feld of Quantum computing. For instance, IBM joined forces with Vodafone in exploration quantum technology and quantumsafe cryptography, forged a partnership with Cleveland to start with the installation of IBM quantum system one, and started
a partnership with Bosch on strategic quantum computing materials science engagement.

Questions
1
2
Explain how IBM’s network and partnering strategy and position changed as a result of
changes in its strategy (e.g. hardware, service, cloud).
Explain how, at diferent points in time, IBM’s alliance network helped or hindered it in
realizing its strategic objectives.

Note
1 Adapted from Dittrich et al. (2007). See also IBM (2007, 2011a, 2011b, 2022a, 2022b, 2022c, 2022d);
TechScoop (2011).

20
BUSINESS ECOSYSTEMS
Customers are increasingly demanding complex, integrated solutions rather than standardized
products and services delivered in homogenous volume (Williamson and De Meyer 2012).
Internal knowledge and capabilities, even if supplemented with alliance relationships, are no
longer suffcient to meet these demands. Effective companies develop business advantages by
abandoning the vertically integrated frm as the preferred organizational structure, participating together with a variety of partners in innovation communities and actively engaging in
processes of co-evolution and learning (Adner 2017; Iansiti and Levien 2004). Competitive
advantage in the new world stems from knowing when and how to build proftable business
ecosystems and from being able to steer them to lasting growth and continuous improvement. Successful frms act in new economic wholes from which new businesses, new nonproft organizations, new rules of competition and cooperation, and new complete industries
emerge (Adner and Kapoor 2010; Moore 1998). Business ecosystems depict a dynamic coevolving constellation of diverse players, uniting around a particular, occasionally social, challenge (Moore 1996). The key challenge for frms participating in an ecosystem is therefore
to identify and develop opportunities to create value while ensuring that they appropriate a
fair share in light of their contributions (Adner 2017). This chapter starts by exploring this
business ecosystem challenge in some detail in the frst section and then elaborates on types
of business ecosystems and roles participating frms may fulfl (second section). Subsequently,
insights are provided on activities associated with the management of business ecosystems
(third section). The alliance development framework is then used to present specifc managerial guidelines for frms participating in business ecosystems (fourth section). The chapter
concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

The business ecosystem challenge
The concept of ecosystem as coined by Moore (1993) described the interdependence and
co-evolutionary nature of business activities. Gaining prominence, the strategic management,
marketing and innovation literature further conceptualized business ecosystems to include,
for example, innovation, entrepreneurial, industry, platform and service ecosystems (AarikkaStenroos and Ritala 2017). Across these perspectives, a business ecosystem is defned as a
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-20
Business ecosystems
301
constellation of organizations that co-evolve their capabilities and roles, align their investments so as to create additional value and/or improve effciency, and share a set of dependencies as they produce the goods, technologies and services customers need (Moore 1993;
Williamson and De Meyer 2012; Adner 2017). A business ecosystem comprises all of the
organizations, governmental entities and regulations with whom a business interacts, including customers, competitors and media (Cobben et al. 2022; Kelly 2015).These communities
come together in a partially intentional, highly self-organizing manner, such that members
provide contributions that fll out and complement those of the others (Moore 1998). Business ecosystems create, scale and serve markets and possess a collective ability to learn, adapt
and innovate (Adner 2017) (see Table 20.1 for examples).
TABLE 20.1 Examples of business ecosystems
Description
The Hague Security Delta
The Hague Security Delta (HSD) is the largest security cluster in
Europe with strong bonds with the security clusters in the USA,
Canada, Singapore and South Africa. In the HSD ecosystem, businesses,
governments and knowledge institutions work together on innovations
and knowledge in the feld of cyber security, national and urban
security, protection of critical infrastructure and forensics.They share a
common goal: more business activity, more jobs and a secure world.

Drupal
A non-proft business ecosystem organized around a free and opensource content-management framework to design and build web
applications (i.e. websites). Because of continued interaction and
learning between Drupal users, Drupal developers and Drupal service
providers, the Drupal community continuously contributes modules
to the core web application framework. Such modules alter and
extend the core capabilities, behaviour and appearance of a Drupal
site. In January 2022, Drupal celebrated 20 years of ecosystem-driven
innovation. One in 30 sites on the web is powered by Drupal.That
means that most users of the web have experienced Drupal—even if
they don’t know it. Success at this scale is possible because the Drupal
ecosystem exemplifes the values of open source and proves that
innovation is sustained by healthy communities.

Cisco Hyperinnovation
Living Labs
Cisco Hyperinnovation Living Labs (CHILL) is helping Cisco redefne
how ideas come to fruition. CHILL takes a vertical perspective and
creates an environment where a handful of Cisco’s biggest (noncompeting) customers come together, collaborate and build prototypes
to drive rapid results without complicated intellectual property
agreement. In 2019, they focused on ‘Industry 4.0’: the application of
machine learning and IoT technology into the industrial revolution.
CHILL focuses on fve areas—informed decision making, autonomous
automation, enhancing human senses, upskilling and safety, and
supply chain. Since 2018, CHILL has led to two startups, seven patent
applications, and more than 20 internal growth initiatives. Next, Cisco
Systems Inc. has merged CHILL into its global innovation centre
programme and together with thingQbators, they are housed in the
Centoni’s group of Cisco in 2020.

Sources: Cisco (2019, 2020); Drupal (2016, 2022); Furr et al. (2016); HSD (2016).

302
Business ecosystems
Several contextual drivers caused the rise of ecosystems in management practice (Gulati
and Kletter 2005; Williamson and De Meyer 2012). First, to remain competitive, frms are
forced to focus on fewer core activities to cope with rising investment costs and increased
coordination costs due to complexity. Business ecosystems are specifcally attuned to deliver
such complex solutions. Second, the knowledge content of many business activities is rising, and knowledge management becomes increasingly central to competitive advantage.The
model of an extensive ecosystem will become more critical to success as it allows knowledge
and innovation to be rapidly generated and translated in opportunities for growth.Third, as
companies face increasing uncertainty, ecosystems, where the partners can collaborate fexibly
through loosely coordinated development and experimentation, can absorb this uncertainty
more effectively than traditional hierarchies or subcontracting relationships, where deliverables have to be precisely specifed in advance and structures are more diffcult to reconfgure.
Fourth, advanced information and communications technology (ICT) is becoming more
powerful and cost-effective.This enables business ecosystems to economically marshal diverse
resources and knowledge scattered across the globe. Technological advances and falling unit
costs are enabling more complex and dispersed ecosystems to become economical.
Business ecosystems possess unique attributes—(1) core and complements, (2) accelerated
innovation and (3) continuous co-evolution—that make it different from other relationship-based organizational arrangements.A business ecosystem is generally built around a core
product/service and complements to increase value to the user (Adner 2017; Moore 1993).
The core product/service constitutes the basis for providing value to end customers, enabling
a frm to obtain economies of scale and large volume sizes. Complementary products and
services ensure that the customer receives a ‘total experience’ (Moore 1998), an experience
that cannot be created by the core product/service alone. A business ecosystem thus combines a core product with a network of specialist niches (Moore 2006) in which parties make
unique contributions to enhance customer value and create critical mass (Adner 2017). To
be effective, on the one hand the system’s logic is based on an access-and-usage instead of
transaction-and-ownership logic (Williamson and De Meyer 2012). On the other hand, frms
reinvest profts from the core products and services in further additions to capabilities and in
developing future generations of offers. Competition is not the sole driver of success; actors
are incentivized by shared goals and values, as well as by the need to collaborate (Moore 1996).
Thus, the key to a healthy ecosystem is a network of mutually rewarding relationships (Zahra
and Nambisan 2012).
The imperative for businesses to learn and innovate has never been greater. Business ecosystems provide businesses with access to people and resources, whether they are located
with suppliers, customers or competitors. Innovation is the result of connecting and integrating knowledge across different felds and industries and is therefore accelerated in the fuid,
permeable, exchange-oriented and co-creative communities that are forged by ecosystems
(Kelly 2015).Thus, innovation drives value creation, opens up niche markets and may trigger
processes of creative destruction.Yet, key to a healthy business ecosystem is that parties within
the system adopt these innovations and create critical mass to leverage resources and stimulate
commoditization.
Business ecosystems are the product of a long and evolutionary process that defnes the
relationships among industry players (Zahra and Nambisan 2012). Specifcally, akin to biological ecosystems, members of ecosystem communities co-evolve their capabilities (Moore
1998). Each member must improve and transform itself while paying attention to, and actively
relating to, other members of the community. Companies thus must pay attention to their
Business ecosystems
303
core business and ensure performance improvement but also ally with others to ensure the
required complementarity in contributions and offerings. Connectivity across specialized
capabilities enables actors to co-create solutions and new business models (Moore 1996).
These continuous processes of co-evolution and renewal ensure the viability of an ecosystem
but also may render an ecosystem obsolete as new business ecosystems emerge.
Despite the potential advantages of business ecosystems, among which are innovation,
market access, renewal and proftability, the challenge for a frm participating in a business
ecosystem is to identify and develop opportunities to create value while ensuring that they
appropriate a fair share in light of their contributions. In dealing with this challenge strategically, parties should acknowledge that their performance (and that of other members) is
dependent upon the health and performance of the whole ecosystem. Building strong and
interdependent linkages among ecosystem members is thus critical but also may impose risks,
including loss of proprietary knowledge, lock-in effects, competence trap and inertia (Moore
1996; Zahra and Nambisan 2012).
Before we proceed, we deem it important to discuss a critique on the business ecosystem
concept. First, some ambiguity surrounds the concept of business ecosystems (AarikkaStenroos and Ritala 2017). Specifcally, other concepts with a focus on interdependency
and innovation have been coined, such as open innovation (Chesbrough 2003), triple helix
(Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff 1995, 1997) and multi-partner alliances (see Chapter 17).These
conceptions share characteristics with business ecosystems, however, the latter are different
to the extent that the underlying theoretical logics—core-complement, accelerated innovation and co-evolution—depict an alternative way of organizing external relationships
(see Table 20.2 for a comparison). Restated, viewing a corporate network as an ecosystem
requires more than connecting the innovation funnel to the outside world, monetizing
unused IP, or tapping into cash-strapped but idea-rich ventures (Van Dyck 2012).

Business ecosystem attributes
Business ecosystems are viable in competitive environments where customers demand complex integrated solutions, where knowledge is a key resource and tends to be dispersed among
parties and locations, and where uncertainty demands fexibility in how value is created
(Moore 1996).Their success depends on three critical attributes: (1) ecosystem members, (2)
ecosystem types and (3) evolution.

Business ecosystem members
Within a business ecosystem, different types of members can be identifed, including ecosystem leader (i.e. providing core technology), suppliers (i.e. offering technology enhancements),
complementors (i.e. providing add-on offerings) and customers (i.e. procuring integrated
solutions) (Adner and Kapoor 2010; Dedehayir et al. 2016; Iansiti and Levien 2004; Moore
1998). To establish and develop a business ecosystem, an ecosystem leader is indispensable. The ecosystem leader sets the roles of other members and coordinates the interactions
between them. Also the leader orchestrates the resource fows, attracts new ecosystem members, orchestrates collective action, stimulates the discovery of complementarities and sets the
rules for value creation and capturing (Dedehayir et al. 2016). Lead frms may take on the
role of ecosystem frontrunner, either as keystone or dominant leader. An effective keystone
leader ensures the survival and prosperity of the ecosystem, by improving the health of the
304
Business ecosystems
TABLE 20.2 What is a business ecosystem, and not?

Characteristics
Business ecosystem
Open innovation
Triple helix
Multi-partner alliance
Description
Constellation
of parties,
collaborating on
a core product/
service and
competing on
complements
Commercialization
of external and
internal ideas by
developing outside
(and inside) paths
to a market
Constellation
of university,
industry and
government,
organized in a
meta-innovation
system
Constellation
of parties,
collaborating in
a partnership to
attain private and
common objectives
Organizational
priority
Creation and
exploitation
of market
opportunities
Creation and
exploitation of
innovations
Contribute and
partake in an
innovative region
Creation and
exploitation of
shared resources
Organizational
boundaries
Open, member
by choice
Open, partner by
selection
Open, member
by location
Open, partner by
selection
Customer
focus
To offer
integrated,
innovative
solutions
To offer new
products/services
No direct
customer focus
To offer best
products/services
Management
Self-organizing, or
lead frm
High levels of
internal control
Self-organizing,
or lead partner
High levels of
internal control
Financial
Optimize fnancial
return through
the ecosystem
Optimize fnancial
return from
innovation
Optimize
fnancial return
from presence in
region
Optimize fnancial
return from alliance
relationship
Performance
Firm performance
depends on
eco-system’s
performance
Firm’s performance
depends on its
innovative ability
Firm’s
performance
depends on its
ability to capture
synergies
Firm’s performance
depends on
its ability to
appropriate value
Examples
Amazon,
Microsoft, Google,
Drupal
Proctor & Gamble,
Hewlett Packard
Amsterdam
Economic Board,
Joint Venture
Silicon Valley
Sky team,
One World,
SEMATECH,
WiFi-alliance
Attributes
Sources: Chesbrough (2003); Etzkowitz and Leydesdorff (1995); Moore (1998).

ecosystem as a whole, and creates and shares value with ecosystem members.That is, keystone
leaders exercise a system-wide regulator role despite their small part in the ecosystem’s mass.
In contrast to this open approach, a dominant leader favours a closed approach and aims to
integrate horizontally or vertically to exercise control, or even directly own, a large proportion of the ecosystem. It attempts to dominate all niche markets, for example, by leveraging
and controlling access to the technological platform. Even if a dominant frm relinquishes
direct control over the ecosystem, its main goal remains to extract as much value as possible.
Niche players represent the bulk of the ecosystem and play a critical role in value creation and
Business ecosystems
305
innovation. Niche players develop specialized capabilities that differentiate them from other
members.They focus on a narrow domain and seek to improve their position while leveraging complementary resources.
Other roles in an ecosystem relate to value creators (Dedehayir et al. 2016). In their
upstream position, suppliers for example coordinate the infow of resources and deliver materials, technologies and services to other ecosystem members. Assemblers aggregate received
resources and information received by others to deliver products and services that result from
this assembly. Complementors extend the core offering of the ecosystem, and, as such, their
offering needs to function in conjunction with the contributions made by other ecosystem
members. However, a complementor’s offering must meet customer demands as to generate
value. The user (i.e. customer) contributes to the ecosystem by indicating a demand, which
invokes the emergence of the ecosystem. In addition to value creation roles, other actors
fulfl supportive and entrepreneurial roles. Universities and research organizations contribute knowledge necessitated to enhance the ecosystem’s value proposition. Entrepreneurial
frms contribute to an ecosystem’s renewal ability; through investments, sponsors are critical
to safeguard an ecosystems growth; and regulators enable or inhibit ecosystems by loosening or tightening regulatory restrictions. Though each ecosystem encompasses these roles,
their involvement varies with ecosystem development. For example, an ecosystem leader may
initially focus on building a collective understanding among initial members, a role which
transitions into the formal coordination of resource fows. Users participate in ideation during the early stages, but as the ecosystem matures, their role shifts towards purchase and use.
In addition to different roles, within business ecosystems members may vary with regard
to their organizational origin (Zahra and Nambisan 2012). Established frms may initiate the
building of business ecosystems and take on a leadership role. Ecosystems offer established
frms several advantages.The ecosystem enables them to offer integrated solutions to customers, reduces the need to own complementary resources and offers fexibility and access to a
repository of knowledge and leverage to entry barriers (i.e. entrants have to duplicate the core
product and compete against the whole system).Another way for an established frm to participate in an ecosystem is to launch a corporate-sponsored venture to probe or exploit opportunities.Although these corporate ventures can beneft from the resources, skills and connection
of their parent corporations, they also face the dual challenge of building credibility with their
parents and establishing market legitimacy.Though better funded than independent ventures,
their ability to capture and exploit opportunities might be constrained by their parents’ goals
and controls placed on them. New ventures may also enter the ecosystem and occupy a niche
position with a complementary service to a core product. These entrepreneurial ventures
tend to be adept in reconfguring their business models, and over time, they may develop into
ecosystem leaders.Their advantage stems from their ability to learn quickly, share knowledge
and anticipate rival moves and a lack of path-dependent constraints (e.g. sunk costs and prior
relationships). Limitations may result from entrepreneurial overconfdence and optimism, frst
mover disadvantages and organizational constraints, such as a lack of time and funding.

Business ecosystem types
Value-creating business ecosystems exhibit strong linkages between members of the ecosystem.These relationships develop because of specialization in different skill areas, historical ties
among members and personal relationships among people working in different parts of the
ecosystem (Zahra and Nambisan 2012). The long-term success of an ecosystem hinges on
306
Business ecosystems
understanding, managing and effectively and creatively exploiting these linkages. Members
thus work on building relationships, cultivating them and recognizing their importance in
transforming the ecosystem with regards to introducing new business models and capturing
market opportunities. Although linkages constitute the cornerstone of any business ecosystem, different types of business ecosystems exist with distinct relational attributes, advantages
and disadvantages: (1) business ecosystem, (2) innovation ecosystem, (3) entrepreneurial ecosystem, (4) platform ecosystem and (5) service ecosystem (Aarikka-Stenroos and Ritala 2017;
Cobben et al. 2022).
The business ecosystem model involves a group of frms coming together to exploit a
market opportunity based on an explicit (product/service) architecture that is defned by a
dominant frm, or the keystone leader (Adner 2017).The ecosystem leader, who often holds
proprietary rights of the technology, provides strong leadership by envisioning and clarifying
the organizational architecture, which offers a basis for structuring the activities of members.
For example, ICT companies such as Microsoft, Intel and IBM use technology to build
and maintain an orchestra-model ecosystem (Zahra and Nambisan 2012). New entrants and
corporate ventures create new products and services that complement the core technology
or become part of an integral solution when combined with the core product or service.
The orchestra model thrives if the leader considers benefts of all ecosystem members before
making decisions and makes sure that members operate within a fair playing feld; an equal
opportunity to become proftable.The primary challenge for the keystone leader is to maintain the relevance of its organizational architecture. Changing customer preferences, competitor moves and technological developments may cause the core product or service to become
obsolete.The keystone leader needs to adjust, adapt and, if necessary, reinvent its offering. Such
modifcations tend to be inhibited by the leader’s inability to change as it may demand that
they challenge competences they have developed over the years.To enable this, some leaders
may use corporate ventures to explore new technological frontiers and help them build new
competences, while preserving existing ones.
In the innovation ecosystem, a dominant frm shops for innovation in a ‘global bazaar’ of
new ideas, products and technologies (Zahra and Nambisan 2012). In pursuit of (technological) innovation, the ecosystem leader uses its proprietary infrastructure to build on these ideas
and commercialize them (Gomes et al. 2018). Regardless of the source of ideas, the dominant
company offers its infrastructure, including design capabilities, brands, capital and distribution channels, for developing and getting innovative products/services to market. It implies
that, for example, a keystone leader redefnes the openness of its organization, and innovation
ecosystems typically comprise of societal actors as well as public organizations to support
innovation (Aarikka-Stenroos and Ritala 2017).The more closed, the more diffcult to absorb
and exploit external ideas and get them to market quickly. The more open may require a
cultural change as well as a need to adopt a long-term perspective in sharing the (innovation)
profts with partners.To accomplish commercialization objectives, members need to openly
exchange proprietary information at the risk of losing valuable knowledge. Corporate ventures may be used to accomplish these goals as it enables established frms to sidestep bureaucracy and corporate routines. In contract, new ventures, or entrepreneurial frms, may focus
on the front-end innovation of keystone or dominant leading members. The identifcation
of knowledge areas may be limiting to a certain extent but can enhance the probability that
innovative ideas are embraced by the leader frm.
In the entrepreneurial ecosystem, members seek to improve and exploit an (existing) innovation architecture or technological platform by developing and contributing modifcations,
Business ecosystems
307
and make these available in integrated solutions to customers (Aarikka-Stenroos and Ritala
2017). Independent new ventures function as the creative engine, albeit within the boundaries
of the existing innovative architecture offered by the leading frms. Soliciting the support of
investors and governments, for example, the aim is to explore alternative applications for an
existing product in new markets, often accompanied by some level of knowledge creation.
This implies not only creating unique value-added modifcations of the product/platform
but also generating new business models to capture value from these efforts. For established
(leading) frms, orchestrating an entrepreneurial ecosystem implies that they need to develop
and provide access to tools and capabilities, enabling other members to make cost-effective
modifcations to the end of attracting a wider range of partners. It also means that these frms
need to adopt a long-term perspective as new ventures may capture some of the rewards.This
is because these new ventures enhance value to the frm’s customers, increase the life cycle of
existing products and/or widen the reach of product/technologies to new markets.
In the platform ecosystem, members coalesce around a technological platform—owned by
a focal organization—connecting multiple sides of markets together (Aarikka-Stenroos and
Ritala 2017). Seeking to attain economies of scale and network effects, the shape of a platform ecosystem is predominantly oriented towards making connections between suppliers and
complementary frms in an integrator business model (see also Box 26.1).Traditional industry
leaders embrace platform ecosystems, and platforms can be found in social media (e.g.TikTok),
entertainment (e.g. Netfix) and telecom (e.g. Wif) industries, for example. The success of
platform ecosystems hinges in a large part on the number and quality of ecosystem members
involved as external partners offer the platform credibility. Reputable partners mitigate concerns regarding data ownership, coopetition, switching costs and security and interoperability,
but they are also critical in attracting new customers by developing innovative (complementary) value propositions (Khanagha 2021). Establishing and advancing a platform ecosystem
requires a balance between openness and control. Openness allows for new partners to become
involved in the platform and reinforce its value proposition through complementary products
and services. Control seeks to harness these second-movers, who may seek to take advantage,
capturing value or creating new business models (rendering the old one obsolete).
Service ecosystems are oriented towards solution adoption (Zhang et al. 2021).With a service ecosystem, members seek to create and capture value through asset optimization around
the services offered and enhance customer experience. Airline carriers are experimenting
with partnerships to create new joint services, banks are contracting with data-processing
frms to offer new fnancial services and mobile communications frms and entertainment
companies are teaming-up to offer electronic news services. Service ecosystems bring additional complexity regarding co-branding (i.e. customer brand perceptions), performance evaluation (i.e. evaluating intangible services) and mutual interdependence (i.e. matching service
quality). Extending beyond co-branding and co-sharing of assets, service ecosystems entail a
constellation of service offerings, where the multiple actors’ service systems develop manyto-many relationships, and customers increasingly co-create value through the combination
of service offerings from multiple frms (Vink et al. 2021). By extending and diversifying the
services offered in a well-integrated seamless experience, the delivery of a combined service
by a service integrator supposes tight collaborative activities between service partners and
necessitates a lead company to align tasks and contributions derived from the cooperation
agreements.Within service ecosystems, to appropriate value, customers interact with service
providers at different stages of the service process. Customer involvement is critical as the
achievement of a critical mass of interacting actors determines the value of the network. Lead
308
Business ecosystems
TABLE 20.3 Ecosystem types
Elements
Main goal
Main actors
Orchestration
Value creation and
capture
Business
ecosystem
Competitive
advantage
Focal frm, suppliers,
complementors
Focal frm
orchestrator
Focus on frm-level
value capture
Innovation
ecosystem
Innovation
Technology leader,
government
Focal frm
orchestrator
Focus on frm-level
value creation and
capture
Entrepreneurial
ecosystem
Growth
New ventures,
investors
Collective
orchestration
Focus on ecosystem
value creation
Platform
ecosystem
Technological
advantage
Technology leader
Focal frm
orchestrator
Focus on ecosystem
value creation
Service
ecosystem
Integrative
service offering
Service provider
Collective
orchestration
Focus on ecosystem
value creation
Sources:Aarikka-Stenroos and Ritala (2017); Cobben et al. (2022).

service frms, such as platform owners, serve as typical ‘orchestrators’ in that they create the
necessary organizational systems and conditions for resource integration among other actors
to take place (Fu et al. 2017).
A business ecosystem could be considered an overarching concept for distinct types of
interdependent and co-evolving systems of actors, technologies and institutions (AarikkaStenroos and Ritala 2017), among which include innovation, platform, entrepreneurial and
service ecosystems. More recently, however, other manifestations of business ecosystems
emerged (Van Dyck 2012). For example, science ecosystems are geared towards the front-end
of the innovation-conversion cycle (i.e. idea generation). In such an ecosystem, value is created and captured by building critical mass when pushing the scientifc frontier in an applied
feld.The shift towards better disease understanding after the cracking of the human genome
made ecosystems a viable alternative in the pharmaceutical industry. Pharmaceutical frms
use ecosystems, comprised of universities, biotech and rivals, to develop and market personalized medicine approaches in such a manner that they obtain suffcient critical mass to make
it proftable. Business ecosystems tend to become increasingly omnipresent across industries,
typically combining elements of the various ecosystems types. For example, frms like Apple
and Amazon take on leading roles in business ecosystems to innovate and market their devices.
Lego, however, the Danish plastic building blocks company, provides a perfect example of a
merged, service- and technology-based ecosystem with its use of customer crowdsourcing
but also with its toy robotics platforms developed with the help of MIT. But, even though
managing a retail or banking ecosystem is different from managing an Intel semiconductor
or Pfzer’s pharmaceutical ecosystem, generic management implications can be identifed.

Business ecosystem dynamics
The challenge to deliver more complex solutions to customers while simultaneously limiting
capital expenditures and costs has extended beyond high-tech industries into other industries,
promoting the rise of business ecosystems (Tjemkes 2021).Activating, catalyzing, guiding and
Business ecosystems
309
promoting collaboration within ecosystems enable ecosystem members to innovate, reconfgure and create added value to the customer base. As such, business ecosystems evolve, and
transformation stems from the internal and external environment, materializing through processes of lifecycle stages, teleological purpose, dialectical tensions and co-evolution, thereby
showing an intricate interaction among external, organizational and strategic stimuli that
leads to business ecosystem dynamics.
Conceiving ecosystem evolution to follow a stylized lifecycle, ecosystems progress through
four phases—birth, expansion, leadership and self-renewal (or death) (Moore 1993). In Stage 1
(birth), an ecosystem leader establishes a value chain for creating value for customers; in
Stage 2 (expansion), emerging business models capture value for a larger number of customers.
Members are able to scale up. In Stage 3 (authority), ecosystem leaders set the future direction
to encourage partners to work together and secure stability within the ecosystem. In Stage 4
(renewal), via learning and adaptation, a new business ecosystem emerges from the incumbent
business community by bringing new ideas and innovations. Alternatively, in the absence of
self-renewal, the business ecosystem dissolves. Drawing on a teleological view, Adner (2017)
proposed an ecosystem-as-structure approach, stipulating that an ecosystem represents an
‘alignment structure of the multilateral set of partners that need to interact in order for a focal
value proposition to materialize’ (p. 40).That is, different actors may have different end states
and end goals in mind and initiate action to attain these goals. A dialectical view stipulates
ecosystems change as conficts emerge between opposing forces (thesis and antithesis) that
collide to produce a new organizational form (synthesis) (de Rond and Bouchikhi 2004).
For example, Beltagui et al. (2020) investigated a digital innovation ecosystem and indicated
that ecosystem members cooperate to develop and deliver a joint value proposition; within
the ecosystem, however, members compete for market niches, and the ecosystem as a whole
competes with rival ecosystems, offering a similar value proposition to end-customers. A key
feature of business ecosystem conceptualizations is that they are, by nature, co-evolutionary
(Moore 1996): ecosystems engage in continuous and interrelated self-renewal processes in
an attempt to seek and maintain ft. Beltagui et al. (2020) also indicated, for example, that
within digital innovation ecosystems, internal disruption, resulting from competition for
niches within an ecosystem, and external disruption, introduced by an actor external to an
ecosystem, invoke learning and adaptation processes.

Managing business ecosystems
According to Moore (1998), strong business ecosystems enact a virtuous cycle of investment and return in which improvements target the ecosystem’s core and the community of
allies.This demands that ecosystem members couple strategic thinking with entrepreneurial
insight to create, shape, navigate and exploit business ecosystems (Dedehayir et al. 2016; Zahra
and Nambisan 2012). Strong ecosystem members are able to simultaneously create and discover opportunities while creatively and proftably exploiting other opportunities. As such
they are able to collaborate with other members, while competing with them when required
(Kapoor and Lee 2013). Although the majority of business ecosystem studies take the perspective of an ecosystem leader (e.g. Moore 1998; Williamson and De Meyer 2012), the
managerial insights presented may apply to all parties involved in the ecosystem; the extent,
however, may vary with the type of ecosystem and the position a frm occupies. Nevertheless,
once a company’s senior management has adopted the business ecosystem perspective, it may
deploy six mechanisms by which they may accomplish their objectives and build a proftable
310
Business ecosystems
TABLE 20.4 Business ecosystem management
Key to advantage
Focus
Implementation
Pinpoint added
value
Enhance customer value by
improving functionality, offering
innovative solutions and offering
higher levels of customization.

By identifying primary sources of value
creation, ecosystem members are able to
target the required complementarities
and hence the right partners.

Structuring
partner roles
Organize ecosystem members’ roles
to achieve benefts of specialization,
provide focus and promote
cooperation over competition.

By differentiating roles, ecosystem
members (leaders and niche) can keep
the burden of partner interaction to
manageable levels.

Stimulate
co-investments
Enables ecosystem members
to amplify the impact of their
investments and create potential for
increasing returns to scale.

By making co-investments, members
together develop value propositions,
reduce uncertainty and encourage
(new) members to participate.

Reduce
transaction costs
Systemize interactions between
parties as to reduce (unnecessary)
bargaining, coordinating and
monitoring costs.

By granting access to knowledge,
resources and tools, ecosystem members
establish fexible arrangements with a
high degree of transparency.

Enable
fexibility and
co-learning
Enable a mix of formal and
informal knowledge sharing to
fexibly promote knowledge
creation.

By stimulating continuous interaction
and learning between ecosystem
members, they and the system as a
whole become adaptive and resilient.

Engineer
value capture
mechanisms
Creatively engineer value capture
mechanisms to monetize members’
contributions, incentivize them and
counter free riding.

By leveraging proprietary knowledge,
reaping economies of scale and
acquiring access to new markets,
members optimize their value.

Source:Adapted from Adner (2017); Williamson and De Meyer (2012).

business model (Williamson and De Meyer 2012): (1) pinpoint added value, (2) partner roles,
(3) co-investments, (4) transaction costs, (5) fexibility and co-learning and (6) value capture
mechanisms (see Table 20.4).
The frst step towards creating a sustainable business ecosystem is to pinpoint why the
ecosystem will create added value to the customer.To have parties involved in an ecosystem,
it is prerequisite that the system is attractive to them as well as to customers (Khademi 2020).
Customers’ willingness to pay depends on the recognition of incremental value from the
ecosystem over and above that offered by alternatives.A large and diverse ecosystem can create additional value for the customer by improving functionality, promoting faster innovation
or enabling higher levels of customization.This analysis enables new and participating (lead)
frms to assess resource complementarities and opportunities for co-learning.
To deliver customer value, the activities of parties with complementary capabilities need to
be aligned in a business ecosystem (Kapoor and Lee 2013).The lead frm (or parties together)
needs to create a structure and incentives for attracting partners and managing overlap and
possible conficts between them. Such a structure may entail different roles for different parties
(Moore 1996;Williamson and De Meyer 2012). If an ecosystem has a lead frm (e.g. innovation and platform), it is the responsibility of this frm to establish a core capability that can
Business ecosystems
311
become the basis for providing real value to end customers. It needs to seek and align a combination of players and contributions.The leader must invest in and generate returns from an
ever-expanding community of allies.The ecosystem leader must rediscover and reinforce his/
her own strongholds and strive to establish business ecosystems around them. In addition to
a leader role, parties may fulfl the role of knowledge source and provide, for example, access
to technology, competences and customers.They could act as market maker and may help to
gain acceptance of complementary products and services in the market by pursuing sales of
their own products and services. Parties may act as niche players who enhance customer value
by offering specialist products and services. For example, the set of niches composing the
ecosystem needs to be complete; all of the necessary tasks to deliver value need to be covered.
Structuring an ecosystem and partner roles is an ambitious task, but if successful, the designed
architecture is likely to attract valuable parties (Adner 2017). Moreover, a well-designed ecosystem achieves the benefts of specialization and focus of individual partners and promises
cooperation over competition.
Partners in an ecosystem will only co-invest if they see the prospect of building a proftable business. Clear value proposition will invite partners to invest, implying that (lead) frms
identify proftable market (niches) and reduce uncertainty. In a healthy ecosystem, (lead) frms
refrain from encroaching on proftable niches as such action reduces parties’ propensities to
investment. In turn, (lead) frms proactively stimulate joint investments to generate and capture market opportunities.To reduce uncertainty, parties may work with a roadmap for innovation, enabling them to make sense of unforeseen events and make investments to strengthen
the ecosystem.This is, for example, particularly salient in fast-moving industries with rapidly
changing technologies.
One disadvantage of an ecosystem, compared to a vertically integrated frm, is the relatively
high transaction costs that result from having a multitude of relationships. If transaction costs
are not managed, they can quickly outweigh the customer value generated by the ecosystem.
To systematize interactions between partners, a (lead) frm may develop and share a set of tools,
protocols and contracts.Alternatively,frms may invest in relational governance.The mechanisms
used depend on the nature of the interdependencies and risks to which partners are exposed.
For example, contracts may be used in situations of asymmetric dependence, but co-branding
(i.e. reputational enforcement) is an informal mechanism. In general, within an ecosystem, fexible arrangement and transparency are key to create a healthy system. Whereas fexibility is
required to deal with contingencies and unforeseen events, transparency reduces risks associated
with moral hazard (e.g. free riding or renegotiation). If well managed, parties’ behaviours will
generate a self-reinforcing cycle of collaboration and trust, reducing transaction costs.
Few ecosystems can expect to be static in terms of their structure, partner roles and relationships. An inherent advantage of an ecosystem, compared to single organizations, is the
potential for dynamic re-confguration and accelerated learning. Flexibility and learning are
a prerequisite for healthy business ecosystems because efforts to align and organize a diversity
of partners with different backgrounds and experiences are thwarted by infexible structures.
Rather, in an ecosystem, the objective is to design an architecture that can be changed and
adapted in response to development in the market and technological environment.A healthy
ecosystem, therefore, is a highly malleable structure combined with specifcations with regards
to roles, contributions and performance. One way to enable continued learning and interaction is through a tier-system in which parties obtain different privileges (i.e. analogous to a
club membership). For example, startup ventures are loosely coupled, whereas founders make
up the core of the ecosystem. This mixture of formal and informal knowledge sharing and
312
Business ecosystems
creation based on continuous interaction within formal and informal relationship arrangements invokes fexibility and learning.
A critical issue in business ecosystems pertains to the mechanism deployed to share value
between the parties involved. Amid the hype around ‘openness’, one might forget that a
healthy business ecosystem must be contributing to a frm’s performance. Even if a frm is
the lead company controlling the architecture (e.g. management of intellectual property), it
is not a suffcient guarantee that it will capture suffcient value. One mechanism to capture
value entails that a frm contributes a unique component or activity to the ecosystem, one
that cannot be easily replaced with an alternative (or procured through an open market, or
imitated).The frm needs to engineer a mechanism to monetize the value of this contribution, which may include licence fees, royalties, expanded margins or profts on higher sales
volumes.Though transparency fosters a healthy ecosystem, it may impede a frm’s ability to
maximize value capture. Information asymmetry constitutes a source of power and competitive advantage, particularly in knowledge-intensive businesses.At the same time, withholding
critical information may undermine the ecosystem’s overall proft pool. A useful principle to
achieve the right balance is to share information on the interfaces but keep the inner workings of your contribution proprietary and non-transparent.
To conclude, although the mechanisms discussed apply to all frms, ecosystem-savvy
incumbents have an advantage over new entrants and are likely to remain in power (Moore
1998). This is because members of the ecosystem are reluctant to switch to new (leader)
entrants, particularly if the ecosystem is creating value. The uncertainty that comes with a
new entrant raises the question of whether it will equate volumes, offer protection, resolve
disputes and build a thriving ecosystem. Sustainable ecosystems demand a certain degree of
ecosystem-entrenched incumbents (Moore 1998), which explains (in part) why some business ecosystems have failed to establish themselves. If members do not see an architectural
alliance as the only way to obtain and sustain a competitive advantage, business ecosystems are
likely to be unable to bring value to large numbers of customers.

Business ecosystems: decision-making steps
Firms participating in business ecosystems are confronted with tension between creating and
capturing value. Excessive value appropriation undermines collective value creation as well
as a partner frm’s individual ability to appropriate their fair share of the value. In order to
provide guidelines for successfully leading or participating in business ecosystems, the next
section elaborates on specifc decisions for business ecosystems at each stage of the alliance
development framework (see Figure 20.1).

Step 1: alliance strategy formulation
The decision to establish an alliance is not only infuenced by frm-specifc imperatives, such
as resources and strategic opportunities, but also how a frm is, or desires to be, involved in a
business ecosystem. In addition to generic guidelines on alliance strategizing, a governance
mode decision should also incorporate decisions about the role the frm aspires to in the
business ecosystem (i.e. lead frm or niche player), the extent to which the frm possesses the
required resources (e.g. technological leadership or complement technologies) and its disposition towards other ecosystem members (e.g. collaborative or competitive). As such, before
partaking in a (new) business ecosystem, a frm needs to make a comprehensive analysis of the
Business ecosystems
313
1
Alliance strategy
formulation
Determine the aspired role in the ecosystem, assess the desired
resources and formulate the disposition towards other members.
Assess the value creation potential of the business ecosystem and how
to add value, as well as how to capture value.

2
Alliance partner
selection
Leverage business ecosystem to identify and gather information on
potential partners.
Extend partner selection analysis with criteria, including ecosystem
reputation and willingness to co-invest, co-learn and co-evolve.

3
Alliance
negotiation
Consider the business ecosystem model and ecosystem leadership in
choosing negotiation approach (e.g. ecosystem operating rules).
Acknowledge that creativity is a prerequisite to identify value
creation opportunities and develop value capture mechanisms.

4
Alliance
design
Design decisions are influenced by the modus operandi of the
business ecosystem: formal and informal governance mechanisms
may be equally efficient and effective given prior collaborative
history, self-organizational ability and leadership approach.

5
Alliance
launch
Generic alliance launch guidelines are sufficient to attain an efficient
and effective alliance launch in a business ecosystem.
Account for specific business ecosystem practices to avoid violating
implicit and/or explicit rules of engagement.

6
Alliance
management
To a large extent generic alliance management practices apply to
alliance management with partners in business ecosystems.
Pay specific attention to new opportunities for (niche) market growth
within the ecosystem.

7
Alliance
evaluation
Extend generic performance metrics with business ecosystem metrics
capturing system- and firm-level process and outcomes.
Metrics capture the extent to which a firm’s participation in a business
ecosystem generates sufficient (strategic) value.

8
Alliance
termination
Assess the impact of terminating or withdrawing from a business
ecosystem on firm’s competitive position.
Exiting should be communicated to other ecosystem members to
create transparency and signal a readiness for future joint efforts.

FIGURE 20.1
Alliance development framework: business ecosystems
value-creation potential of the system and how it may contribute, as well as how the frm will
appropriate value from the ecosystem to legitimize its participation. Based on the results of
these assessments, a frm may decide to abandon a business ecosystem strategy, establish a new
business ecosystem, participate in an existing business ecosystem or enhance or change their
role/position in their existing business ecosystem.As part of the strategy, frms may also decide
to participate in multiple business ecosystems in various stages of ecosystem development. For
example, companies such as Google, Microsoft and IBM develop and invest in different business ecosystems simultaneously.

314
Business ecosystems
Step 2: alliance partner selection
Once the decision has been made to participate in a business ecosystem, frms need to assess
which partners are likely candidates to forge alliance relationships. Partner selection depends
on the role a frm aspires to play in the system. For example, a niche player may need to establish a formal relationship with a keystone leader, who owns proprietary rights of a technological platform. For example, a game developer, representing a niche player, needs to choose
between different technological systems, including Xbox, PlayStation or Nintendo. Similarly,
leading frms need to select partners that complement their core offer. As such, a resource
analysis focusing on complementarities is critical, as well as a competitor analysis with a
focus on interdependencies between ecosystem members. Critical questions guiding partner
selection may include the following: to what extent does a potential partner add value to the
business ecosystem? To what extent is a potential partner embedded in other (rival) business
ecosystems? To what extent is a potential partner likely to disrupt, positively or negatively, the
modus operandi of the business ecosystem?

Step 3: alliance negotiation
The manner in which alliance negotiations unfold, for example, formalized or informal,
largely depends on the business ecosystem model. In a tightly controlled ecosystem with a
dominant leader, negotiation bandwidth tends to be limited and the outcome pre-determined
(e.g. if you are an Apple IOS platform application developer). In contrast, in a more fexibly
coordinated ecosystem with a keystone leader, alternative opportunities to create and capture
value could become part of the negotiation agenda (e.g. if you are an Amazon Fire platform
application developer). In setting the negotiation agenda, it is also important to acknowledge
that, as business ecosystems are complex organizational arrangements, creativity is a prerequisite to identify value-creation opportunities and develop value-capture mechanisms.

Step 4: alliance design
Generic alliance design guidelines take an ‘alliance as stand-alone arrangement’ view, which
means that they neglect the infuence of the business ecosystem on design decisions. In a business ecosystem, the product and service requirements of the customer must be well understood by all members of the ecosystem. This understanding guarantees the collaboration of
members towards common objectives, and, if applicable, an ecosystem leader assumes a central
position by securing and organizing the cooperation of (potential) members, which collectively deliver value to the customer. In addition, it is also important for members to protect
the new innovation idea from competitors, while at the same time forging strong ties with
lead customers and important channels of delivery. To accomplish these objectives, business
ecosystems tend to use standardized alliance structures, primarily to economize on transaction costs, enact fexibility and accommodate a need for co-learning and co-evolution. As
such, equity-based arrangements are less likely to be adopted as non-equity-based arrangements ft better with these requirements. As with alliance networks (see Chapter 19), relational capital between ecosystem members promotes collaborative behaviour and increases
members’ awareness that free riding may not only damage bilateral alliance relationships but
also the whole ecosystem. For example, as business ecosystem members meet during informal encounters, including conferences, dinners and social events, and during more formal
Business ecosystems
315
meetings to set agendas, develop innovation roadmaps and organize lobby activities, relational
capital is likely to be created. Such activities create behavioural norms and stimulate colearning as relational capital mitigates the threat of unwanted knowledge appropriation and
allows parties to collaborate with different ecosystem members.

Step 5: alliance launch
When taking a business ecosystem view, general alliance launch guidelines are suffcient to
attain an effcient and effective alliance launch. However, alliance launch managers should be
aware of two points. First, the alliance launch team should pay attention to specifc business
ecosystem practices that have been built prior to the frm entering. Formal and relational sanctions may befall the frm if they have violated the implicit and explicit rules of engagement.
For example, it is imperative for an ecosystem entrant (or creator) to obtain an understanding
of how peers in the ecosystem defned what customers want, what the value is of a proposed
product or service and how the offer is best delivered. Short-term success often goes to those
members who best understand customer requirements. Second, if new members get involved
in the ecosystem and forge an alliance relationship with a frm, alliance launch managers should
pay specifc attention to the development of a common view, promote collective sense making
and facilitate the learning process.This means they are not only learning from the individual
frm but also from and about the alliance and the whole business ecosystem. To accomplish
these two tasks, it is critical alliance launch managers act as a boundary spanner, set up liaisons
with other members and work with them to defne and fne-tune the frm’s value proposition.

Step 6: alliance management
Alliance management practices in business ecosystems are to a large extent similar to practices adopted in bilateral alliance arrangements, which include building relational capital,
stimulating learning, dealing with tensions and conficts and enacting change to enhance performance. Specifcally, management activities may focus on maintaining alignment between
alliance partners but also with the ecosystem. Also, management should organize frequent
meetings to discuss the future of the alliance, within the context of the ecosystem, to enhance
the commitment of the partners (and other ecosystem members). Specifc attention should
be given to changing conditions that may alter a frm’s bargaining power in the alliance; it is
critical to maintain strong bargaining power in relation to the partner but also other players
in the ecosystem, including key customers and valued suppliers. In addition, to maintain the
viability of the ecosystem, and thus alliance relationships, alliance management should continuously explore new territories of ecosystem growth. It is possible that rival frms, part of
competing ecosystems, seek to capture similar market opportunities. These battles are more
likely to be won by a given ecosystem if members maintain strong alliance relationships and
apply their expertise in complementary resources.

Step 7: alliance evaluation
By adopting a business ecosystem perspective, the generic performance metric system should
be supplemented with metrics that capture system- and frm-level business ecosystem process and outcomes. System-level measures pertain to the viability and health of the system
316
Business ecosystems
(e.g. number of product offers), the resilience and robustness of the system (e.g. threat of
competitive ecosystems), the adaptability of the system (e.g. leader change initiatives) and, for
example, the extent to which the business ecosystem is able to renew itself and to generate
(niche) spin-offs. Firm-level metrics for example capture the extent to which membership
reduces transaction costs (e.g. selection, negotiation, monitoring), offers new opportunities for
value creation (e.g. new markets) and enables access to knowledge (e.g. technology). These
frm-level metrics together should provide a frm insight into the extent to which its participation in an ecosystem generates suffcient (strategic) value to continue without changes,
to intervene or to withdraw from the ecosystem.Together, these business ecosystem metrics
enable a frm to capture emerging threats from new ecosystems and innovations, or upheavals in the ecosystem’s environment, such as those pertaining to government regulations and
business chances, which create opportunities for new ecosystems to emerge. It also implies
that in addition to an alliance score card (i.e. performance system), a frm may develop a business ecosystem dashboard, which comprises metrics that support business ecosystem decision
making and strategy. For example, such a dashboard may provide insight into ecosystem spinoffs, renewal or death. With regard to alliance evaluation outcomes, there are three possible
responses: continuation with, renewal of or withdrawal from the alliance.

Step 8: alliance termination
From a business ecosystem perspective, an alliance termination decision is more multifaceted
when compared to the decision to dissolve a bilateral alliance relationship. Before fnalizing a
termination decision, it is critical to assess the impact of this decision on the frm’s competitive position.This is because a premature decision to dissolve an alliance relationship may have
unforeseen and adverse consequences. For example, a premature termination of an alliance
may also mean withdrawal from the business ecosystem.This could imply that access to valuable resources is blocked, a frm is not able to capture the benefts from innovation, and it may
negatively alter customer perceptions.Any decision to withdraw from the business ecosystem
should perhaps be postponed until the negative repercussions are resolved. In the case of a
formal exit, the decision should be communicated to other ecosystem members to create
transparency and openness. It also acts as a signal that the frm is reliable and ready for future
(business ecosystem) endeavours.

Summary
Vibrant business ecosystems depict a new form of organizing economic activities and constitute a powerful, and according to some the only, source of competitive advantage.The challenge to deliver more complex solutions to customers while simultaneously limiting capital
expenditures and costs has extended beyond hi-tech industries into other industries.Activating, catalyzing, guiding and promoting partners in an ecosystem will enable the system to
innovate, reconfgure and create added value to the customer base. Despite the advantages,
a business ecosystem is not always the optimal and most viable strategy. Firms should avoid
the inclination to hop on the bandwagon and participate or lead ecosystems without value
potential. Nevertheless, a company in pursuit of value may attain interests in multiple business
ecosystems, which means it should coordinate its cross-ecosystem activities. Two challenges
are awareness and identifcation of inter-ecosystem synergies and decisiveness to organize a
timely entry or exit from a business ecosystem.

Business ecosystems
317
CASE: APPLE VS AMAZON
1
Since the industrial era, companies that have had the best assets have usually been the
most competitive. However, this situation has changed over the last decade. In today’s competitive environment, companies are constantly looking for new sources of customer value.
Organizations are often unable to generate this value on their own and therefore have to
rely on an ecosystem of organizations that helps and supports them in fnding this new
value. The ability to collaborate with an increasing number of varying stakeholders, which
are more and more loosely connected to the company, is essential in meeting ever-changing
customer demands. This is especially true in the hi-tech industry, but it is notable how two
giants are choosing very different strategies.
Apple Computer Inc. (Apple) was founded in 1976 by Steven Jobs and Steve Wozniak. For
almost three decades, Apple focused on the design and manufacturing of personal computers,
including revolutionary models like the Apple II, which institutionalized the home computer
market; the Macintosh, which revolutionized the DTP market; and the Power Mac. In the mid1990s, Apple was struggling because of an ill-controlled product portfolio that enabled other
hardware manufacturers to use Apple Operating Systems, products that were too expensive
and competition that was not sitting still. The introduction of Microsoft’s Windows95 further
reduced Apple’s competitive advantage. In 1997, Apple bought NeXT, the company Steve
Jobs had founded in 1985 after he was forced to leave Apple. Steve Jobs regained control
of Apple and ended the possibility of Apple clones; Apple itself introduced the translucent
plastic iMac in 1998. This marked the turnaround of the company. In 2001, Apple introduced
iTunes and the iPod. With iTunes, Apple created a media management system that acted as a
front layer for devices that were introduced in the following months and years. In 2001, Apple
shocked the world with the introduction of the frst iPod. Through the iPod, users could listen
to music and later also videos using a cleverly designed device. In 2007, Apple introduced
the iPhone, which revolutionized the smart-phone industry. The year 2010 saw the release of
the iPad, which basically defned the tablet market. Apple knew that it required an ecosystem
approach to differentiate itself from a traditional appliance manufacturer.
With the introduction of the iPhone in 2007, Apple allowed third-party software developers to develop software for Apple devices. Third-party developers could download a software development kit for free to develop applications for the iPod and iPhone and later
the iPad. Publishing the applications in the App Store is only possible after paying an Apple
Developer Connection membership fee; then the apps go ‘on sale’ in the App Store. The
software developer is free to set a price for the app, but Apple receives a 30 per cent fee.
The App Store was launched in 2008, which fuelled the success of the iPhone and iPod. The
App Store set the standard in the smart-phone market, which has been followed by Google’s
Play Store and Microsoft’s Windows App store. In the business ecosystem that Apple has created, Apple is the dominant player. It holds frm control over its ecosystem. For one thing,
Apple has to frst sell its devices, with high margins, before publishers in the App Store can
sell their products. This latency in earning models requires publishers to be fully dependent
on the ability of Apple to develop and market an attractive platform. Next, Apple has the
fnal authority to decide what it will and will not publish on the App Store. In 2022, Apple
and Mercedes-Benz announced that Apple Music’s highly acclaimed Spatial Audio with support for Dolby Atmos is now available as a native experience in Mercedes-Benz vehicles for
the frst time, delivering on a shared commitment to provide customers worldwide with
the very best music experience. Also in 2022, Apple accelerated its work with suppliers to
318
Business ecosystems
decarbonize Apple-related production and expand investments in clean energy and climate
solutions around the world. Apple requires from their suppliers to report on progress
towards these goals—specifcally Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions reductions—and will track
and audit annual progress. Apple also encourages suppliers to address the greenhouse gas
emissions beyond their Apple production, prioritizing clean energy.
Amazon has taken a very different approach in managing its business ecosystem. Amazon was founded in 1994 by Jeff Bezos as an online bookshop. Bezos quickly realized that
the company could increase its footprint in the retail industry by increasing the width of the
assortment. Therefore, collaboration with other markets was required, ranging from video
and music to gaming. Next, Amazon realized that it could beneft from other entrepreneurs
selling products on the internet if it was able to cross sell through the Amazon retail engine.
By the end of 1996, Amazon had launched the Amazon Associates Program. Amazon associates could place an Amazon banner or a link on their website or link directly to the Amazon
homepage. When a visitor clicked on the Associate’s website and landed on the Amazon
website and purchased a book, the associate would receive a commission fee.
Through this programme, Amazon enabled third-party website owners to build their
business through the advertising of Amazon products. When a purchase is made at such a
third-party website, the purchaser is actually buying Amazon products. The website owners earn referral fees at the moment a purchase takes place. In the following years, Amazon
began to increase its service offerings to affliates by developing technology to support
the startup of web shops, thereby lowering the entry barriers for entrepreneurs to start
web shops and subsequently increasing traffc to Amazon websites. With the introduction of the eReader Kindle Fire, it required the availability of content and a very affordable
consumer price. It sacrifced hardware profts in order to subsidize book publishers and
movie studios to publish their content on the Amazon Kindle. Given that affliate marketing
is performance based and fnancially motivated, Amazon uses a clever and well-balanced
system. Amazon and its partners beneft directly from an online purchase from the Amazon platform. Amazon enables writers and booksellers to proactively participate in the
ecosystem, as well as those that want to sell to the Amazon community. Given the fact
that both the objective and fnancial reimbursement are aligned, partner collaboration is
easier to orchestrate. Amazon continuously forges partnership to support its ecosystem.
For example, in 2022, Amazon helped Disney fans worldwide to get excited about the D23
fan expo. The partnership with Walt Disney Archives offers Amazon a unique opportunity
to showcase Walt Disney’s iconic Grumman Gulfstream company airplane. The plane will
be displayed for guests at the D23 Expo as part of the exhibit Mickey Mouse One: ‘Walt’s
Plane, presented by Amazon’. The plane serves as the central inspiration for Amazon’s
custom merchandise.
Apple and Amazon have taken very different approaches to managing their respective
business ecosystems. Apple has created an Apple community in which Apple is the cornerstone and has a dominant position. Amazon positions itself as a facilitator of retail business
using its retailing platform. Retailers have a high liberty of use and have an equitable stake
in the ecosystem, unlike in the Apple ecosystem. However, both models have been very successful. Apple has become the most valuable company in the world and has sold more than
140 billion apps in its App Store. Amazon has attracted millions of affliates and has become
the biggest online retailer in the world.

Business ecosystems
319
Questions
1
2
3
Applying a business ecosystem lens, provide a systematic comparison of Apple’s and
Amazon’s ecosystems. Explain why both ecosystems are successful.
Taking the viewpoint of developers, explain why they would participate in either the
Apple and/or Amazon business ecosystem.
Identify the future hazards and adversities that are most likely to undermine the success
of both business ecosystems.

Note
1 Amazon (2022a);Adner (2012);Apple (2022a, 2022b); Isckia and Lescop (2009).

21
ALLIANCE PROFESSIONALS
Managing alliances to achieve a shared objective is not for the faint of heart. Alliance professionals have the responsibility to ensure effective governance of the relationship, protect
their frm’s interests and maximize long-term value for the partner frms. Alliance management thus requires multifaceted individuals that possess abilities to be fexible and adaptive
to the role necessary, and with a set of characteristics that enhances, not detracts, from the
alliance objectives (Isabella and Spekman 2001). One of the issues with alliance professionals
however is that there is no consistent academic or managerial defnition of what an alliance
professional is or does. For some frms it may mean an exclusive executive position, whereas
for other frms it pertains to middle management or operational functions. In addition, for
one frm alliance professionals associate with procurement and sourcing, for another with
learning innovation and business development, and for other frms, with distribution channels, or a combination of these functions. Depending on the nature of the alliance and the
organizational structure of the partners, alliance professionals may thus occupy different hierarchical positions, fulfl different roles and require distinct competences. Despite this variety,
one common denominator stands out. Successful alliance relationships demand dedicated
and effective alliance professionals (Bruner et al. 2003) with skills and competences that
transcend traditional organizational functions (Spekman et al. 1998). This chapter starts by
exploring the uniqueness of alliance professionals and then elaborates in the second section
on hierarchal positions and alliance roles. Subsequently, in the third section, insights are provided on alliance managers’ traits and competences.The fourth section presents managerial
guidelines. The chapter concludes with some points of interest and a case illustration of an
Alliance Director.

Alliance professionals: a unique job
Given the complexity and idiosyncrasy of alliance arrangements, hierarchical positions, role
defnitions and job titles with regard to alliance arrangements vary across frms and regions
in the world (see Table 21.1 for examples). Despite this diversity, academics and practitioners
alike share the idea that alliance professionals possess a unique function within organizations (Bamford et al. 2003; Simoons 2016). When compared to CEOs, for example, alliance
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-21
TABLE 21.1 Alliance professionals job advertisements (excerpts)
Description
Responsibilities
Qualifcations
Alliance manager at Cisco
To work in collaboration with
various stakeholders to contribute to
the achievement of revenue targets
by implementing alliance/vendor
partnership plans that are robust and
competitive.

To identify appropriate contacts and
target businesses/organizations, cultivate
interest, nurture leads.
To develop the ability to provide
leadership, develop trust, negotiate
objectives and work directly with a broad
group of senior executives across industry
verticals.
To work cross-functionally.
To create alliance marketing plans, train
sales teams and develop initiatives to
strengthen alliance results.
To hold quarterly business roadmap
sessions with partners, aligning on
strategies for mutual growth.

Good interpersonal, communication, and
organizational skills.
Good analytical skills and display good
business acumen.
Good relationship-building skills with
the ability to engage with a variety of
internal and external stakeholders.
Good team players and maintain the
integrity and display.
Good attention to detail.
Great presentation, verbal and writing
skills; ability to communicate complex
ideas effectively across a wide range of
audience levels and functions.
Demonstrable network of industry
contacts.

Alliance partner manager—
Phoenix Market at Slalom
Slalom takes a new approach to the
traditional channel sales, partner sales
position and evolves the role to a
position that helps combine sales,
local market enablement, strategic
forecasting and global delivery.

Co-creates a partner strategy for the
market with local leadership, builds brand
awareness, aligns sales and client teams
with partners, such as Salesforce,AWS,
Snowfake, Microsoft and Google Cloud,
and is a technology enthusiast through
and through.

Building strong, trusted relationships
within Slalom’s strategic partner
ecosystem.
Generating sales pipeline through partner
relationships.
Working with local market leaders to
co-create a strategic partner road map.
Evangelizing local market wins, both
internally across Slalom and externally
with partners.
(Continued)
Alliance professionals
Job
321
322
TABLE 2.1 (Continued)
Description
Responsibilities
Qualifcations
Alliance manager
sustainability and trust at
Deloitte
Help Deloitte lead the development
of capabilities in priority solution
areas with alliance partners.Alliance
partners are a critical component to
win work in our emerging markets.

In the feld area of strategy:
To articulate how the alliance
partnership aligns with and elevates
Deloitte emerging market opportunities,
capabilities and frm strategy.
To lead and participate in multidisciplinary discussions regarding the
alliance relationship and ongoing
development needs.
To relay marketplace signals shared by
alliance partners with frm leadership
to inform ongoing strategic planning,
prioritization sales and subsequently
deepen the relationship.
In the feld of Operations:
To maintain a strategic alliance plan,
coordinating with Deloitte and the
alliance, to keep a current view of a
go-to-market approach, priorities, sales
and pursuit targets, and other fnancial
and non-fnancial goals.

Minimum 5+ years of related
professional experience with 2+ years
focused on alliance management or
equivalent experience working with
external vendors.
Experience articulating value
propositions for alliance products.
Experience navigating a complex
ecosystem of stakeholders with
demonstration of creating and
maintaining relationships internally and
externally.
Outstanding interpersonal and
communication skills that foster and
build relationships at all levels.
Ability to travel 20–60%, on average,
based on the work you do and the clients
and industries/sectors you serve.

Sources: LinkedIn (2022a, 2022b, 2022c)
Alliance professionals
Job
Alliance professionals
323
professionals share with the former that both span the entire product/service life cycle with
a clear focus on value creation, the main difference being that an alliance professional has
limited budget, resources and formal decision-making power. Account managers and alliance professionals both deal with an external relationship. However, sales and procurement
type relationships are typically about value-exchange with near-term results, suggesting that
account managers may overlook long-term value-creation opportunities and lack the experience in spanning all functional areas of an organization and up to executive level required to
create long-term value.When compared to project managers, alliance professionals are alike in
that task and team coordination are critical.They are different in that project managers tend
to focus on managing the task and team, whereas alliance managers need to deal with shared
decision making, shared responsibility and accountability, shared resource commitment and
shared risk and reward.
Alliance professionals focus on the ‘collaborative’ work of alliance relationships and can
be considered as its choreographers or orchestrators (Kittel 2013). Successful alliance professionals simultaneously operate on the inter-organizational, intra-organizational and interpersonal levels (Bruner et al. 2003). On the inter-organizational level, alliance professionals
must balance the needs, resources and desires of the partner frms. On the intra-organizational level, alliance professionals must manage the needs, resources and desires of their
own frm. On the interpersonal level, alliance professionals must manage relationships with
peers, supervisors and subordinates not only in their own frm but across the boundaries of
their partner frms. Confronted with this balancing act, the rules that apply to bureaucratic,
hierarchical organizations are likely to fail when imposed on alliance professionals (Spekman
et al. 1998).
The complex linkages among strategies, structure and systems of partner frms and the
alliance require a perspective that is different and unique, specifcally when compared with
more traditional structures and coordination mechanisms in organizations. Alliance professionals must gain their counterpart’s agreement on mutually achievable goals and must enact
relationship building and interactional processes to achieve these goals. In alliance arrangements, the people involved struggle with balancing the demands of formal and informal
governance. Although role demands are affected by the hierarchal system, effective alliance
management depends on one’s ability to work outside of prescribed routes and routines. Successful managers rely on persuasion and infuence, which are bound by the social fabric of the
alliance relationship (Hutt et al. 2000). Simply, command and control and/or management
by fat will not work, as partner frms remain autonomous. Compromise, infuence and trust
emerge as key operative terms, as one simply cannot dictate how colleagues in the alliance
should work.
High-performing alliance professionals possess a unique mixture of functional skill sets,
interpersonal skill sets and alliance mindsets (Bruner et al. 2003). Functional skill sets can be
considered the tools that a manager calls upon to accomplish specifc objectives throughout
the business cycle.These skills are similar to skills of business and line managers. Interpersonal
skill sets can be considered the tools an alliance professional uses to initiate, cultivate and
maintain relationships throughout alliance development.Alliance mindsets are an overarching
perspective that frames how a manager approaches alliance problems and creates order from
ambiguity and chaos (see Chapter 24). In other words, alliance professionals hold a strong
disposition towards long- and near-term value creation through external relationships; possess
skills that pertain to value-discovering, curiosity, interpersonal focus, creativity and out-ofthe-box thinking; and act as agents of growth and transformation (Kittel 2013). People whose
324
Alliance professionals
perspectives accentuate creativity and learning, in addition to business savvy, would make the
strongest alliance professionals.
Strong alliance professionals are able to deal with the tension between acting according
to the spirit of the collaboration and acting in pursuit of the frm’s interests (Vangen and
Huxham 2003). It seems thus reasonable to conclude that, when compared to more traditional organizational functions, alliance professionals possess unique responsibilities, skills
and perspectives that transcend, for example, the capabilities required to be a strong line or
project manager. Is also implies that it is risky to assume that successful business, functional or
line managers can be promoted to alliance professional positions and adopt an inspiring and
motivating leadership role (Spekman et al. 1998). Although the skills and traits discussed are
important, how they become manifest varies with alliance professionals’ positions and roles
and the alliance development stage (Isabella and Spekman 2001).

Hierarchical positions and alliance roles
Despite the complexity of alliance arrangements and idiosyncratic use of alliance professionals within frms, it appears that frms consistently assign tasks and responsibilities to alliance
professionals operating at different hierarchical levels. Here, we distinguish between three
hierarchical levels—operational, middle management and executive level—and detail three
associated alliance jobs: (1) alliance manager, (2) senior alliance manager (3) and the alliance
director. In addition to these positions, frms assign and designate personnel to fulfl different roles, either part-time or full-time tied to the alliance, among which are alliance team
member, governance committee member, alliance coordinator and various supportive roles
(see Table 21.2). Although positions and roles may overlap, for the sake of clarity, we discuss
them separately.

TABLE 21.2 Examples of alliance professionals’ roles
Role description
Critical because . . .

Alliance
team
member
Individual who works directly with
frm and partner colleagues in the
alliance and is engaged in activities
such as R&D, manufacturing,
marketing, distribution, etc.

Without alliance team members, the
alliance would become an empty shell;
an executive agreement without clear
operational alliance tasks and activities.

Executive
sponsor/
alliance
champion
Member of the focal frm’s
top management, who assumes
responsibility for the development of
the alliance at the executive level and
is the contact for top management of
the partner.

Without sponsorship, top management
sends an internal signal indicating
a lack of importance and commitment,
which will undermine value creation.
Escalation of conficts continues without
executive involvement and resolution.

Governance
committee
member
Individual who represents the
alliance and the frm on a joint
committee responsible for working
with the partner on strategic and
organizational issues.

Steering committees set the alliance
strategy and supervise its execution.
Tasks pertain to budgeting, forecasting,
approving plans developed by subcommittees and reconciling conficts.

Alliance professionals
325
Role description
Critical because . . .

Alliance
coordinator
Internal contact person for a specifc
alliance or internal coordinator of
all cooperation activities in a specifc
feld or business.

Alliance coordinators create internal
alignment between and across functions
and offer cross-functional input to the
alliance manager.
Alliance coordinators understand and
communicate the implications of alliance
decisions on respective functions.

Internal
consultant
Pool of internal specialists who
provide technical support for
individual alliance management tasks.

Without internal consultants,
opportunities to enhance effectiveness and
effciency of alliance arrangements may
be missed.
Internal consultants stimulate internal
learning and cross-fertilization of alliance
best practices.

Relationship
manager
Contact person for a specifc alliance
partner at the operative level who
co-ordinates all co-operation
activities with this partner.

Without relationships managers, early
warning signs about adversities and
conficts may go unobserved.
Building strong and resilient working
relationships demands specialized skills
and knowledge.

Supportive
staff
Personnel assigned to the alliance
to provide assistance to make the
alliance work; examples include
lawyers, legal specialists, administrative
support, launch managers and
innovation experts.

Without support staff, alliance
development tends to be inhibited, and
successful continuation is at risk.
Legal specialists are critical during alliance
design, launch manager during startup and
innovation experts during management.

Launch
manager
Individual who is solely responsible
to successfully implement and
execute the alliance, consistent with
the alliance contract.

Without a launch manager, the transition
from design to management is impeded.
Launch managers organize launch
meetings, set feasible milestones, build
relational capital, secure resources and
steer the alliance towards its objectives.

Sources: Bamford et al. (2003); Hoffmann (2005); Isabella and Spekman (2001); The Rhythm of Business (2016).

Positions
An alliance manager is responsible for ensuring that day-to-day operating requirements for
assigned alliances are effectively managed and performance objectives are achieved (ASAP
2016).The alliance manager serves as the primary point of contact with the alliance partner
and is responsible for attaining alliance objectives.The tasks and activities an alliance manager
may initiate involve, but are not restricted to, supervising the alliance management team,
organizing appropriate communications, coordinating activities, anticipating and resolving
adversities, facilitating confict resolution, managing escalation, solving business problems,
negotiating with the partner on ongoing agreements and winding down the relationship.
Alliance managers also develop and maintain relationships with all individuals involved in
the alliance, either working internally or at the partner level. Furthermore, a key task is to
326
Alliance professionals
establish performance standards, use scorecards and gather data to evaluate and manage the
performance of an alliance.The results of these assessments are reported to the senior alliance
manager. As a rule of thumb, an alliance manager is often responsible for one major alliance
or several secondary alliances.
A senior alliance manager is responsible for directing all the activities for assigned alliances (ASAP 2016). In addition to the operational tasks required of an alliance manager, the
senior manager is expected to contribute to the development of tools, processes and strategies employed by alliance managers to ensure effective coordination across the portfolio of
alliances.That is, he/she directs and supervises activities across the complete alliance life cycle
and ensures that suffcient and appropriate resources are allocated to alliance activities.A senior alliance manager may have mentoring and/or supervisory responsibility for alliance manager-level individuals and is committed to improve competence levels of individuals working
in the alliance.The senior alliance manager will report to the director of alliance management
and is typically responsible for one or more major alliances or (part of) the alliance portfolio.
The director of alliances is responsible for the performance of alliance relationships and
thus coordinates overall alliance management resources to ensure appropriate coverage across
the organization’s portfolio of alliances (ASAP 2016). His/her tasks encompass the design
and management of the alliance portfolio, coordinating activities between internal functional
departments and providing support for activities initiated by partners.Administrative responsibilities include staffng of the alliance management function and overall the credentials of
people involved.The alliance director is often responsible for a team of alliance managers and/
or senior alliance managers and reports to a divisional or organizational executive. If multiple
alliance directors are appointed, a vice president of alliances has an executive function and
may supervise them.
When compared with one another, the alliance manager, the senior alliance managers and
the alliance director (or VP of alliances) differ, in addition to hierarchical position, with regard
to two job elements. First, an alliance manager is primarily engaged in single alliance management: the effciency and effectiveness of a designated alliance relationship. In contrast, the
senior alliance manager and the alliance director are engaged in multi-alliance management,
the supervision of alliance portfolios, networks and ecosystems. Second, and not surprisingly,
to qualify as an alliance manager, in general, less experience is required, and one may fulfl
different roles when compared to more senior positions.

Roles
A frst critical role an alliance professional may fulfl is that of alliance team member.An alliance team member works directly with the frm and partner colleagues in the work of the
alliance (Hoffmann 2005), such as the development, manufacturing or commercializing of a
product.As such, they are part of an alliance project team or working group.As a team member, responsibilities include but are not limited to having a general understanding of the purpose and limits of the contract, being knowledgeable about the frm’s position on issues that
impact their function, monitoring project budget and forecasts as applicable to team member’s
function and working collaboratively with their counterparts (The Rhythm of Business 2016).
Senior alliance managers or the director of alliance may become a member of the alliance
steering committee and thus fulfl the role of governance committee member (Hoffmann
2005). Governance committee members represent the alliance and the partner frms in a
joint committee responsible for steering the alliance towards its objectives. Specifcally, the
Alliance professionals
327
committee members set the alliance strategy and decide how it is achieved, recommend
budgets and forecasts relevant to the partner frms, approve plans and supervise sub-committees, reconcile and resolve differences between the partners and represent the alliance internally and externally (The Rhythm of Business 2016). In sum, governance committee members
provide oversight to keep the alliance on track.
A critical role which contributes to the successful management of an alliance relationship
pertains to that of executive sponsor or alliance champion (Hoffmann 2005). Usually, this role
is assumed by a senior executive, and his/her involvement encompasses more than appointing
alliance managers (Hutt et al. 2000). Executive sponsors defne the meaning of the alliance and
assume a critical role in communicating the strategic role of the alliance in creating an identity
for the alliance within the organization. He/she provides the alliance managers with support,
such that he/she ensures the alliance has the necessary resources, endorses requests made by the
alliance manager, provides advice to the alliance manager and mediates if internal conficts occur
(The Rhythm of Business 2016).Without an executive sponsor, the alliance is less likely to succeed.
A unique role, which preferably is executed by a senior staff member with experience and
knowledge about the organization, is that of alliance coordinator (Hoffmann 2005).To ensure
that the collaboration among functions (or business and felds) and affliates is effective and
effcient, alliance professionals, such as governance committee members, also have an internal
role to work with the alliance manager. These alliance coordinators enable communication
between functions, update functional leadership, ensure functional resources to achieve (intermediate) alliance objectives, provide cross-functional input to the alliance manager and help
to foster internal alignment. In some instances, a governance committee member may appoint
a deputy to serve this role, provided that the deputy has suffcient authority to carry it out.
The alliance roles discussed, and the other roles listed in Table 21.2 (e.g. internal consultant
and supportive roles), share the belief that to successfully fulfl a role, the person responsible
should possess appropriate skills and an alliance mindset. However, the roles differ with regard
to work-orientation and leadership. First, some roles, such as internal consultant and supportive
roles, operate more on the intra-organizational level (e.g. company focus), whereas others focus
more on the inter-organizational level (e.g. relationship focus), such as governance committee
members. Some roles, such as alliance champions, operate on multiple levels, the intra-organizational level (e.g. providing internal support), the inter-organizational level (e.g. preemptively
deal with relationship tensions) and the inter-personal level (e.g. building strong personal relationships), whereas other roles are less demanding, such as team member and internal consultant. Second, some roles (and positions) demand alliance leadership. Leadership in alliance
arrangements demands that he/she engages in processes of embracing, empowering, involving
and mobilizing individuals partaking in the alliance arrangement (Vangen and Huxham 2003).
This particularly applies to alliance directors and senior alliance managers, but alliance managers
also need to inspire personnel (from both sides) to actively partake in the relationship, even if
their assigned role is limited in time and constrained to a specifc alliance developmental stage.

Alliance manager: attributes and competences
Research investigating the importance of roles and positions of alliance management showed
that the alliance manager function, relative to other alliance professionals, is most critical to
generate value-creating alliance relationships (Hoffmann 2005). Alliance managers can be
described as choreographers or orchestrators acting within or to support an alliance arrangement (Canter and Twombly 2016; Kittel 2013). They have deep knowledge of the business,
328
Alliance professionals
are politically savvy, possess diplomatic skills and excel in interpersonal communication.They
also possess great amounts of both tenacity and empathy and tend to challenge traditional
hierarchies, lines of authority and existing ways of working within each partner organization.
Strong alliance professionals embrace creativity and learning (Spekman et al. 1998). Taken
together, alliance managers possess unique cognitive attributes and competences.

Cognitive attributes
Personality traits often associated with alliance managers include being a risk taker, refective,
a careful listener and open to new ideas (Kittel 2013). Other traits that have been attributed
to alliance managers pertain to diplomacy and analytic mindsets (Simoons 2016).These traits
together suggest that an alliance manager is able to operate as diplomat and lobbyist, connect
people and information, and get things done, primarily based on sound analysis, experience,
out-of-the-box thinking and creative strategies.That is, strong alliance managers see and think
differently when compared to other more traditional functions (Spekman et al. 1998).
An alliance manager’s unique perspective has been asserted to originate from unique cognitive attributes (Isabella and Spekman 2001). Strong alliance managers recognize and attend
to multiple points of view simultaneously. They use this information to build creative solutions, serving the interests of partner frms. For example, an alliance manager may propose
a creative business model with hybrid compensation to align partners’ interests. In addition,
strong alliance managers learn from past experiences but are not constrained by them.They
use their own experiences, but also those of others outside their company, to build generalizable principles and best practices and apply them creatively to resolve a current problem.
In doing so, they use imagination and intuition to think across time and see into the future.
Good alliance managers are creative and ever curious and questioning.They have an ability
to recognize patterns in disorganized data and disorder in apparently orderly circumstances.
They also see what is possible and have an innate talent for improvisation, managerial qualities which are all necessary to operate successfully in a hierarchical vacuum surrounded by
uncertainty; that is what an alliance is.

Competences
All-round and high-performing alliance managers possess a specifc set of competences
(ASAP 2016; Isabella and Spekman 2001). Strong alliance managers possess functional or
context competences.These competences pertain to the foundational elements that enable an
alliance manager to perform his or her job duties effectively but are not exclusive or unique
to alliance management. These skills are important to perform the work job but do not in
themselves ensure that the alliance management group is fulflling its strategic mission for
the company. Such skills include communications skills, time management, confict resolution, contract negotiation, fnancial management, interpersonal skills and project management. Critical among these competences are interpersonal skills (Isabella and Spekman 2001),
which enable an alliance manager to build strong relationships, act comfortably in social
business settings, interact across cultures and with people, use verbal and non-verbal communication techniques and affect the mood of individuals and groups.Alliance managers also
need to possess core competences (ASAP 2016). Core competences are functionally critical
skills; they are key to the success of the alliance manager in defning and driving an alliance.
Such skills include intimate knowledge of the alliance life cycle, alliance governance, alliance
Alliance professionals
329
BOX 21.1 ASAP CERTIFICATION
The Association of Strategic Alliance Professionals (ASAP) ofers an alliance management certifcation programme providing ASAP members with the opportunity to
demonstrate their mastery of core alliance skills and the management of all forms of
collaborative business relationships. The programme features two levels of certifcation:
1
2
Certifcation of Achievement—Alliance Management (CA-AM)—the frst level
of certifcation for up-and-coming alliance professionals.
Certifed Strategic Alliance Professional (CSAP)—the advanced level of certifcation for seasoned practitioners with a command of the full alliance life cycle from
inception to termination.

ASAP has established the following skill sets for alliance management professionals:
context competencies, core competences, business and industry knowledge, and company-specifc competences (see section on attributes and competencies for details).
These competencies are skills that can be learned or developed through experience.
Individuals seeking certifcation will be tested on ASAP’s Context & Core Competencies. In addition to being a successful alliance manager, individuals should have
a complete knowledge of their organization’s business and industry and their company’s specifc competencies. Becoming certifed demonstrates a commitment to the
profession. Just as important, certifed alliance management professionals are recognized leaders and serve as role models within the alliance management profession.
Certifcation thus not only brings value to the organization but also to the alliance
professional.
Source: ASAP (2016).

management, professional development of alliance managers, collaborative climate, alliance
portfolios and collaborative network and ecosystem.These are all competences that are used
by the Association of Strategic Alliance Professionals to certify alliance managers’ credentials
(see Box 21.1).
In addition, strong alliance managers possess company-specifc knowledge and skills.
Knowledge, which is very specifc to the company and its strategy (ASAP 2016), enables an
alliance manager to understand the role and the mission of the strategic alliance group and
the role and mission of the particular alliance to be managed. Knowledge includes company
general market priorities and overview, company partnering culture, company-specifc market
and partnering strategy, and company technology initiatives. It also pertains to the extent to
which an alliance manager develops an extensive network in the company and in the industry,
solid relationships within the frm and credibility among superiors, peers and subordinates
(Isabella and Spekman 2001). Business and industry knowledge pertain to the unique demands
that business models and industry differences place on alliances. It is believed that such differences will require alliance managers to adopt and master different practices as a result. They
include, for example, business/fnancial analysis skills, understanding of business models of
different types of partners, partners’ industry knowledge and industry/market value chains.

330
Alliance professionals
Taken together, strong alliance managers tend to be unique personalities with tailored
competences. Developing good alliance managers, therefore, takes time and effort. One of the
reasons why training and educating alliance managers is diffcult is because many of the traits,
skills and competences required are diffcult to learn and perhaps are natural talents. Firms
with short-term time horizons may be reluctant to invest in alliance managers; the pressure to
perform in the present conficts with rewards from training that will come but only in time.
Instead, frms need to act strategically as increasingly alliance managers become a critical cornerstone of executive decisions and successful business models. Therefore, alliance managers
may become the future leaders!

Alliance professionals: decision-making steps
Successfully deploying alliance professionals as the alliance relationship progresses is complex
and challenging (Spekman et al. 1998).To provide a more fne-grained insight, we next discuss
some generic guidelines to manage alliance professionals (see Figure 21.1).

Step 1: alliance professional criticality
Firms that proactively assign and develop alliance professionals are likely to outperform their
rival peers. But prior to that, initiating programmes to select, appoint and educate alliance
professionals, it is salient to assess the criticality of alliance professionals to the organization.
Undeniably alliances are becoming more critical to frms, but frms must understand how and
to what extent alliance professionals are necessitated. Staffng depends on the frm’s business
model and the nature of the alliances within it. For example, as alliance arrangements become
increasingly critical to a frm’s competitive position, and thus a frm engages in more and different types of alliance relationships, staffng hierarchical positions and securing the fulflment
of different roles becomes critical.As such, alliance management, and thus alliance professionals, obtain a legitimate role in an organization. Consequently, a frm needs to develop career
paths, initiate programmes to attract top talent to alliance management and develop criteria
to assign staff to positions, roles and alliance relationships.

1
Alliance professional
criticality
Determine if alliance management is critical to the competitive
position of the firm and, if so, offer legitimization to alliance
professionals (across positions and roles).
Develop and implement initiatives to select, appoint and train top
talent to become alliance professionals.

2
Alliance professional
assignment
Appoint alliance professionals based on their position and role, while
accounting for team compositions and the alliance development stage.
Appoint alliance managers based on match between personal skills
and the type and the criticality of the alliance arrangement.

3
Alliance professional
assessment
Assess and monitor the performance of alliance professionals with
regard to past, present and future tasks, roles and responsibilities.
Provide training and education programs to enhance personal
competences and skills, and if applicable initiate mentoring programs.

FIGURE 21.1
Decision-making steps: alliance professionals
Alliance professionals
331
Step 2: alliance professionalassignment
Choosing an alliance manager is a critical decision to creating a successful alliance.
Different alliance professional positions and roles associate with different stages of alliance development (Isabella and Spekman 2001). During alliance formation, frms decide
whether an alliance is an appropriate governance mode for realizing their objectives.
At this point, decision makers have limited or little understanding whether an alliance
arrangement is the solution to their strategic conundrum. Pre-alliance competitive needs
and motivation emerges, and the top management team need to conduct assessment
on how to organize activities and generate desired resources. The alliance director may
act as visionary and envision the possibilities and opportunities associated with alliance
relationships. A (senior) alliance manager may begin to articulate the strategic intent for
the alliance, create a sense of urgency, start to develop a business plan and begin to form the
requisite criteria for a partner selection. Involved managers must be able to communicate
how an alliance fts within the frm’s corporate strategy. Their aim is to ensure that the
collective effort is coherent and that initiatives are communicated vertically and horizontally throughout the organization. In addition, they should be able to translate a frm’s
requirements into a coherent alliance strategy and create constructive perceptions about
the alliance’s future. During this stage, business skills are important to formulate a sound
alliance strategy, whereas interpersonal skills enable alliance managers to build strong
(internal) relationships and obtain sponsorship. But as the alliance takes shape, networking
and advocating the relationship to internal and external stakeholders becomes important,
and when the alliance solidifes, managing and mediating conficts become key activities
(Bruner et al. 2003).
The next steps—negotiation and designing—require competences pertaining to advocacy
and facilitation. Involved managers must sell the alliance internally to senior and operational
managers. In addition, they must sell the potential partnership to their counterparts. A manager during these stages thus acts as a networker who oversees boundary conditions and disseminates information, both internally and externally. A manager also needs negotiation and
political skills to align conficting interests and explore potential tensions creatively to fnd
common ground and solutions.
Stabilizing and solidifying defnes the stage in which the alliance becomes an ongoing
and viable organizational arrangement. Alliance managers dedicate effort to managing the
alliance with the adjustments and fne-tuning needed to keep it on track. Their main focus
is on smooth operation of the alliance and attending to those issues and adversities that may
bog down its workfows.The manager acts as facilitator and honest broker who is respected
by people involved in the relationship. It is the responsibility of alliance managers to measure
performance against intentional and emergent objectives, fnancial targets and operational
milestones. A manager must be fexible enough to accommodate partners’ interests, possess
competences to rebuild damaged interpersonal relations and have tolerance for unfamiliar or
uncomfortable situations. Endurance and patience will help managers build the honest and
reliable personal relationships needed to foster relationship progress. Sensitivity, defned as an
ability to listen and observe, is also important with regard to building relational norms and
capital. Curiosity is vital: an interest in others contributes to an open climate. In the management stage, an alliance manager needs the competences to act as both an operational manager
and a disturbance handler.

332
Alliance professionals
The alliance termination stage demands, yet again, different skills to extract value from the
relationship and avoid unintended repercussions. A manager should be able to communicate
the termination intention and possess mediation skills to deal effectively with the virtually
inevitable conficts.As in the negotiation and design stages, negotiation and political skills are
required to organize an exit with favourable outcomes.
Taken together, the precise position and role of an alliance professional must refect the
scope, potential value and likely duration of the relationship that needs to be managed. Any
individual alliance manager is unlikely to have such a comprehensive set of competences,
which leads many frms to set up alliance teams. Such teams comprise a group of diverse
people who together personify the managerial competences required for each alliance development stage (see Chapter 22).

Step 3: alliance professional assessment
How do you know a good alliance professional when you see one? To sustain superior
alliance professional performance levels, managers must continuously monitor the development and performance of alliance professionals.Annual performance appraisals provide
the necessary information to take appropriate actions, whether this means to replace,
educate or promote an alliance professional. The criticality of evaluating alliance professionals means that appraisal criteria should ft with the present and possible future
position, roles, skills and competences of an individual. The appraisal results are also
important as they depict an important input for alliance training and education. New
alliance managers working together with more experienced managers in mentoring programmes help to ensure that corporate practices and knowledge are passed on. Furthermore, if unexpected management transitions occur, new alliance managers are prepared
to take over activities.
Following the three steps for alliance professional deployment and development does not
provide a clear-cut recipe for instant success. But, by using the guidelines, alliance professionals can contribute to alliance success.

Summary
Because an alliance is a dynamic interaction of business and people whose purpose is to
achieve mutually benefcial goals, superior alliance performance not only depends on the
rigour of the business case but also on the people who make decisions and support the alliance relationships.Although the work of alliance professionals varies from alliance to alliance,
consistently, academic and professional literature reports that dedicated alliance managers are
pivotal to success.The alliance manager is the key contact point for partner frms and possesses diplomatic skills to keep the partner aligned, entrepreneurial skills to identify and
capture new opportunities, project management skills to meet deadlines and keep the alliance on track, and inter-personal skills to mobilize and motivate personnel involved. Thus,
as a fnal note, we warn again against the common misconception and practice to promote business or line managers to become alliance managers.Alliance managers are creators
of value, and becoming one without training, experience and perhaps an innate talent is
doomed to result in alliance failure.

Alliance professionals
333
CASE: IVAN VOGELS
1
After obtaining a master’s degree in international economics at the University of Utrecht, Ivan Vogels travelled and worked for two years in Asia and North America before he
became junior product manager at NavTeq (later Nokia). Since then, Ivan has worked for
various international IT companies, initially with a strong focus on sales, but as his career
progressed, his key responsibilities shifted towards the management of alliances and partnerships. In his words: ‘I realized after having worked at Marketing, Pre-sales and Sales for
say eight years that working with alliances depicted a challenge to combine marketing and
sales and it promised to be a great area to work in’. According to his LinkedIn profle, he is
result-driven, has an aptitude for international business, is a good communicator, is reliable
and independent, a team player and has an ability to bring ‘structure to chaos’. According
to Ivan: ‘the latter is exactly what companies need when professionalizing their alliances
department’.
In his frst ‘alliance job’, Ivan became Director Alliances and Partnership at eVision. eVision Industry Software, established in 2008, is the global leader in Control of Work software.
Companies in the oil and gas, (petro)chemical and other high-risk and critical infrastructure industries turn to eVision to improve control over their operational processes, resulting
in fully auditable, real-time corporate risk management as well as increased operational
effciency. eVision’s headquarters are based in The Hague, the Netherlands, with regional
offces located in Aberdeen, Stavanger, Houston and Qatar. eVision has a global partner
network and clients covering fve continents. Its single purpose is to empower its clients
to be ‘in control’ of their operations. eVision strive to make it easier for the users to access
information and knowledge that helps them to work safely and effciently. eVision Industry Software is used by some of the largest companies in the world to help them manage risk and achieve operational excellence. eVision’s fagship product Permit Vision is the
market-leading Integrated Safe System of Work, which integrates permit to work software,
risk assessment, isolations management processes and external work order systems into one
user-friendly system.
In general, as an Alliance Director, it is Ivan’s responsibility to establish alliance relationships enabling eVision to increase economies of scope and scale. Specifcally, eVision distinguishes between three types of alliance relationships. Business partnerships enable eVision
to boost and scale sales. That is, these relationships accelerate market growth by creating
new product/service offers in existing markets and by entering new markets, geographical
and customer. In addition, service partnerships are forged to boost and scale implementations trajectories, as they increase fexibility and scalability of offers, and to enhance sales
resources and delivery capacity. With regard to the third type, technology partnerships,
these are used to innovate the software (e.g. integration and features), for example, by
establishing co-development projects and enabling integration with third-party solutions.
Across these different responsibilities, it is also Ivan’s task to leverage eVision’s brand via
the partners. With regard to accountability, Ivan provides monthly updates to the board of
directors (specifcally the CCO and COO); reports will contain information, for example, on
product development progress, lead generation, secured deals and alliance status.
Over time, Ivan’s job has become more complex as a result of eVision’s successful growth
strategy. First, a shift occurred from tailor-made client projects to standardized product
334
Alliance professionals
offerings, imposing a strong need for partnerships with technology developers and hardware suppliers. That is, eVision collaborates with IT companies, such as SAP, Dasault Systèmes, Intergraph, Oracle and Osisoft, to further improve existing and possibly create new
software products. For example, by integrating with graphic software of Intergraph, eVision
can bring the correct plans and drawings to the feld workers. In the frst seven years of its
existence, eVision primarily grew via a direct sales model. It relied on direct sales to market
their products and services and used a team of sales representatives, business consultants,
deal makers and bid managers to secure proftable deals. However, to further scale-up looking at geography and new industries, eVision has been contracting business partners to
increase its addressable market and generating growth via indirect sales through a portfolio
of (international) resellers, among which are business and service partnerships. Business
partners, for example, such as L&T Infotech and Neon Infotech, act as resellers and support eVision in the local marketing, sales and delivery of the products. Service partners
are mostly Global System Integrators such as Accenture, Infosys and Atos, which operate
globally and act as full-service delivery partners and thus generate sales and offer training
and on-site support to clients. Three companies encompass all activities—Oracle, Intergraph
and Accenture—and are therefore considered strategic alliance relationships. As an alliance
director, it is Ivan’s main task to oversee all three partner categories, oversee on-boarding
of new partners, work on a daily basis with the alliances and generate good leads with all
active partners.
To successfully execute this alliance strategy, in support of the corporate strategy, Ivan
required various skills and competences. To be able to interact and deal with a variety of
(potential) partners, he depended heavily on past and present work experiences. For example, his familiarity with international business, marketing and sales, and B2B channels,
all within the context of IT services, made him a credible counterpart for technological,
business and service partners. To adequately deal with internal pressure and resistance—
originating because some employees perceived that the shift from direct sales to indirect
sales may threaten their job—Ivan needed to use his inter-personal communication skills
and emphatically explain to internal stakeholders that alliance partners may be benefcial to
their performance. This is because alliance partners may enhance the quality of the product,
may generate more direct sales, may improve the product experience and may boost brand
exposure.
To manage the alliance team, comprised of four members, Ivan used generic management skills, such as administrative, project, leadership, pipeline management and fnancial skills. In addition, he acted as the spider in a web (1) to obtain internal support from
the board as well as functional managers, (2) to coordinate alliance managers and connect them internally and externally to counterparts and (3) to align alliance partners with
eVision’s internal organization. More importantly, as eVision was growing, changing and
experimenting, Ivan’s know-how of successfully managing change and transformation processes was critical. Within eVision, alliances are both a cause and consequence of organizational change. Managing alliances thus demands a creative and open mindset but also
visibility and credibility within the organization.
To accomplish these and other alliance director tasks, Ivan deemed it important to be perceived as a trustworthy and knowledgeable partner, both internally and externally. According to him, to act as a successful alliance director, it is critical to reconcile a business focus
with a collaborative mindset. He considered it his task to reconcile eVision’s emphasis on
sales and deal making with a mindset comprising cooperation, openness and transparency.

Alliance professionals
335
To enact this process, he proactively built bridges between functional specialists, develops
creative solutions to deal with adversities and secures the commitment and participation of
relevant staff. The partnering strategy has led to an explosion of partner-related and driven
events where eVision was asked to present itself, and the value of partner-related opportunities in the pipeline went up from less than 5 per cent to 30 per cent in about 12 months.
In his subsequent ‘alliance job’, Ivan has become Strategic Alliances Director in Market
Unit NL at SAP. SAP is one of the world’s leading producers of software for the management
of business processes, developing solutions that facilitate effective data processing and
information fow across organizations. The company’s integrated applications connect all
parts of a business into an intelligent suite on a fully digital platform, thereby replacing the
process-driven, legacy platform. Today, SAP has more than 230 million cloud users, more
than 100 solutions covering all business functions and the largest cloud portfolio of any
provider. Globally, SAP operates 19 global alliances, and Ivan is responsible for 9 of those
within the Dutch market, among which include Accenture, Capgemini, and PWC. In his
role, he is responsible for proactively developing the partner’s SAP business by driving sales,
demand generation and partner capabilities with a strong focus on mid-term perspective.
Furthermore, he acts as the central advisor to the partner, owning the partner relationship
end to end and responsible for coordinating all SAP interactions (with executives, working
groups, etc.) in order to drive partner investments and growth in SAP’s solutions portfolio. Regarding long-term development, Ivan’s task is to safeguard health-of-business and
effectuate transformation to new solutions, technologies and business models. In a summary statement, Ivan describes his work as ‘connecting people, connecting business, and
fnd win–win solutions’. To this end, his role demands deep knowledge about the software
industry, partnering and leadership skills, experience with cloud/SaaS solutions, strong analytics competences, an ability to lead teams and executive-level interpersonal skills. The key
performance indicators (KPI) are joint partner revenue, indirect channel revenue, number
of new (certifed) partnerships and number of marketing and sales leads, amongst others.

Questions
1
2
Does the entrepreneurial background and strategy of eVision require unique skills and
competences of an alliance director, specifcally when compared to alliance director
positions in more established, mature and bureaucratically organized companies, such
as SAP?
Alliance arrangements are becoming increasingly critical to the execution of eVision
and SAP’s corporate strategy. How will this development impact and change the tasks,
responsibilities and required competences of Ivan Vogels?

Note
1 Interview with Ivan Vogels; SAP (2022).

22
ALLIANCE TEAMS
The FIFA World Cup, NASA’s Mars Rover and hydro water engines would not exist without
alliance teams. Alliance teams allow the combination of specialized resources and expertise
over organizational boundaries and occasionally national boundaries and are, as such, a key
driver of alliance performance (Li and Hambrick 2005; van der Kamp et al. 2022). While
critical to alliance success, alliance teams are also particularly prone to under-performance.
The tensions in bringing a partner frm’s representatives together and having them work on
individual and shared tasks are immense (Drach-Zahavy 2011). As a result, team members
may struggle with communication, face identifcation issues and form conficting subgroups
(Joshi and Lahiri 2015; Ring 2000). Furthermore, team functioning in alliances is complicated; as in most alliance arrangements, teams face the hardships of teamwork, next to working with other teams that also consist of delegates of partnering organizations (Marks and
Luvison 2012). While alliance-level factors are certainly at play, alliance failure is as much a
team (member) problem as an organizational problem. This chapter starts by exploring the
alliance team challenge in some detail (frst section) and then elaborates on alliance team
types (second section).1 Subsequently, insights are provided on activities associated with the
management of alliance teams as a stand-alone entity and as part of a multi-team system (third
section). Next, we present some managerial guidelines (fourth section), and the chapter concludes with a summary (ffth section) and a case illustration (sixth section).

The alliance team challenge
Alliance teams are temporary collectives of delegates from two or more organizations with a
shared responsibility to coordinate and integrate resources across organizational boundaries
to accomplish individual and common goals at the team, organizational and alliance levels
(Drach-Zahavy 2011; Li and Hambrick 2005).Alliance teams integrate resources from partner
organizations and team members within an alliance context that sets boundaries, constrains
and enables the team and infuences exchanges with other entities in the alliance. Alliance
teams face challenges common to other types of teams.They are temporary structures set up
to deal with uncertain and complex environments; a characteristic they share with project
teams, for example. Alliance teams often are diverse in nationalities and are geographically
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-22
Alliance teams
337
dispersed—characteristics they share with global and virtual teams. Alliance team composition is fuid because when the alliance develops and changes, team members move in and out
of the team—a characteristic shared with R&D and product development teams. In addition
to these shared attributes, alliance teams and their members, however, face a unique challenge.
Alliance team members need to resolve a mixed motive task while operating in a hierarchical vacuum.That is, alliance team members as representatives are expected to serve the
needs of their frm while at the same time focusing on the success of the alliance (Hambrick
et al. 2001). For example, team members work towards a shared objective that asks for cooperation in integrating resources such as knowledge, fnances and IT systems, yet at the same
time they are expected to compete to appropriate maximum returns for their organization.
This tension between cooperative and competitive pressures depicts a source of confict and
disintegration of alliance teams (Li and Hambrick 2005), and team members often fnd themselves conficted in their commitment (Johnson et al. 2002). To complicate matters, alliance
teams tend to start with a blank slate; no formal hierarchical or authoritative structure is in
place at the start of an alliance, though governance mechanisms and authority are installed
as the alliance progresses. Without a degree of hierarchy and authoritative structure, it is
very hard to coordinate alliance activities over teams. Moreover, different alliance teams are
necessary to setup, maintain and adapt the alliance governance structure, which may include
management and operational teams. It is thus important to understand how alliance teams can
improve team and alliance performance, while resolving cooperation–competition pressures
and navigating a hierarchical vacuum.

Alliance team types
The literature on alliance teams tends to be fragmented in terms of feld and theory, most
likely the result of an attempt to acknowledge the variety in alliance teams (van der Kamp
et al. 2022). Strategy scholars, for example, took an interest in the composition of joint venture
(board) teams to explain joint venture performance (Hambrick et al. 2001; Li and Hambrick
2005). Focusing on supplier relationships, other scholars examined the role of customers,
boundary spanning and communication in inter-organizational teams to explain new product
development (Stock 2006; Stock 2014). Studies also emphasized the complexities that arise
when teams are composed of multiple nationalities, such as in international alliance teams
(Li et al. 2002). In these teams, cultural differences complicate effective team functioning, and
without cross-cultural management, these teams will break into factions. Furthermore, alliance teams have been used as a specifc context for studies in the areas of negotiation, engineering, project management, health care and information systems.When comparing alliance
team studies, two observations stand out. See Table 22.1 for an overview.
First, team composition and task change according to the hierarchical level. Typically, an
alliance has strategic (board), tactical (steering committee) and (multiple) operational teams
with very specifc tasks that require different inputs, processes and outputs (Luvison and
Marks 2013).At the strategic level, alliance board teams, or joint venture board teams, play an
active role in formulating and implementing the strategy and governance of alliance arrangements. Their main tasks are to secure the attainment of strategic and fnancial objectives,
protect shareholder interest, secure capital and resource allocation, and enact risk and performance management. These teams act as role models, signal relationships’ importance to
partners’ organizations, lend support at key points, spot new opportunities and determine the
appropriate degree of governance and partner involvement. Beckman and colleagues (2014),
338
Alliance teams
TABLE 22.1 Examples of alliance team types
Category
Teams (examples)
Typical team members
Tasks and responsibilities
Strategic
Alliance board
Joint venture board
Board members,VP
alliances, alliance
directors
The board plays an active role in
three areas critical to drive alliance
performance and protect partners’
interests: capital allocation, risk
management and performance
management.

Tactical
Alliance steering
committee
Joint venture
management team
Alliance director,
senior alliance
managers, insourced
third-party managers
The management team focuses on
planning, coordinating and monitoring
organizational and operational
activities.The team sets (project)
priorities and milestones, assigns staff,
resolves conficts and tracks progress.

Operational
Working groups
Project teams
Operational teams
Research staff,
engineers,
procurement
managers, marketers,
account managers,
alliance managers
Operational teams focus on the day-today operations of designated activities,
which may pertain to any of the valuechain or support activities, among
which are R&D, manufacturing,
marketing, sales and distribution.

Hierarchical
Development
Pre-formation Top management team Board members,
Alliance team
alliance director,
business unit
managers
A frm’s top management team
proactively scans for partnering
opportunities and consults with the
alliance director.Alliance director
develops partnering opportunities
and business cases.

Formation
Alliance team
Negotiation team
Senior alliance
managers, operational
managers, expert
negotiators, juridical
and fnancial advisors
Formation team builds business case,
initiates partner selection, whereas
negotiation team interacts and deals
with counterpart’s negotiation team in
order to set the governance structure
and formalize the alliance agreements.

Management
Launch team
Management team
Launch managers,
alliance managers
The launch team’s main task is to
execute the alliance relationship,
and after the initial execution,
management is transferred to the
management team.

for example, show that when a board includes members with heterogeneous, multiplex relationships, as well as central network positions, diverse alliance portfolios emerge faster.With
regard to decision making and confict resolution, these teams have a defnitive authority.
The alliance steering committee, or alliance management team, coordinates organizational
and operational processes, including staffng, project prioritization, milestone setting and
Alliance teams
339
interventions.Their task is to establish a collaborative climate, craft strategy, manage execution
and discuss and set levels of confdentiality for different categories of information. Management of boundary-spanning agents is also part of their task as alignment of interrelated project
goals and task is critical. Operational teams, also labelled as working groups, are responsible for
executing specifc alliance activities and tasks on a day-to-day basis. For example, operational
teams’ activities may pertain to new product design, building a product line or developing
a marketing campaign. The main task of these teams is to execute tasks and attain shortterm goals and milestones, which implies that they require timely access to information and
resources.Together, the strategic, tactical and operational alliance teams represent the governance architecture of any alliance arrangement.
Second, team composition and task change according to the alliance development stage;
it is thus critical to distinguish between the role different alliance teams may play during
the alliance development stages (Büchel 2000). Before the alliance is initiated, the topmanagement team of a frm may approach potential partners informally to assess whether
an alliance arrangement is feasible (Lee and Park 2008). Such pre-formation interactions
between partners’ representatives increases the likelihood of reaching a formal agreement. If
the top-management team proceeds, an initial alliance team, for example, needs to shape the
alliance; think about goals, tasks and criteria for evaluation (Ring 2000). Often this team is
composed of senior managers, operational managers and alliance managers who are responsible for obtaining top-management support, developing a business case and initiating partner
selection. With regard to alliance formation, for example, negotiations teams are critical as
negotiators have a task to defend and advocate the interests of their frm while concluding an
alliance deal. Negotiations teams are often composed of top managers, negotiation experts,
alliance managers, lawyers and operational delegates who, depending on the negotiation
stage, may be more or less involved in the negotiations. Once negotiations have been concluded, team members’ roles may change as, for example, lawyers withdraw, whereas alliance
launch managers become responsible for alliance execution, and as the alliance develops,
alliance managers become responsible for day-to-day management and the supervision of
operational teams. If the alliance is terminated, new team members may be appointed, for
example, to handle juridical and fnancial issues between the partners. Taken together, ‘the’
alliance team does not exist, but rather within alliance arrangements, multiple alliance teams
are required, and they are jointly responsible for alliance success.

BOX 22.1 MULTI-DIMENSIONAL CONCEPTUALIZATION OF
ALLIANCE TEAMS
Research on alliance teams exhibits a lack of consensus among researchers on how to
conceptualize an alliance team, which inhibits the development of a coherent body
of knowledge on alliance teams. Building on the results of a review of alliance team
research, van der Kamp and colleagues advance a multi-dimensional conceptualization
of alliance teams. Alliance teams can be positioned in a multi-dimensional landscape
along three dimensions: factionalism, team scope of responsibility and team entitativity.
Factionalism is the extent to which interests compete between (groups of) partner representatives in relation to fnite resources, such as materials, authority and status within
the team. Scope of responsibility includes the range of team tasks and the responsibility
340
Alliance teams
and decision-making authority that come with these tasks over functions, people, processes and resources across the alliance and partner organizations. Team entitativity can
be defned as the property of a group, resting on clear boundaries and clear internal
structure, and making a group ‘groupy’. The three-dimensional landscape can conceptually distinguish a joint venture working group from a joint venture management
team. Joint venture working groups often have pre-defned short-term tasks (narrow
scope of responsibility) and team members with aligned interests (weak factionalism) who
work together coherently in an entity on its own (high entitativity). However, a joint
venture management team can be defned by vested interests between representatives
(strong factionalism) who face a range of complex and ill-defned tasks across organizational boundaries (broad scope of responsibility) as part of a larger constellation of teams
(low entitativity). Based on this, the performance drivers of a joint venture working
group might have more similarities to other alliance teams with similar attributes than
to a joint venture management team. The proposed conceptualization furthers the
understanding of how alliance teams difer from intra-organizational teams by focusing
on the inter-organizational characteristics of alliance teams. It also allows for advancing insights on the formation, functioning and outcomes of (diferent) alliance teams.
Source: van der Kamp et al. (2022).

Managing alliance teams
The literature on alliance teams is permeated with different theoretical perspectives, all of
which provide partial explanations for alliance team functioning and performance (van der
Kamp et al. 2022). Most research relied on micro-level social psychological and small group
theories, such as social identifcation and categorization, to explain team processes and outcomes (e.g. Li and Hambrick 2005; Luvison and Marks 2013). Meso-level theories on boundary spanning (Büchel 2000; Drach-Zahavy 2011) and systems approaches (Luvison and Marks
2013) have proven helpful to point out that alliance teams operate in a larger environment
that affects their performance. Other studies adopted macro-level theories, such as transaction
cost and exchange theories, to examine strategic and structural components of alliances and
teams to explain, for example, bargaining costs in alliance negotiations (e.g. Johnson et al. 2002;
Pearce 2001).While it is insightful that many theories apply to alliance teams, it is beyond the
scope of this chapter to provide a full account.Therefore, we briefy detail two alliance team
perspectives: (1) stand alone and (2) multi-team system. See Table 22.2 for an overview.

Alliance team: stand-alone perspective
The majority of alliance team studies viewed alliance teams as stand-alone entities. These
studies sought to explain alliance and alliance team outcomes by focusing on the effect of
team-level variables. Specifcally, the effects of team formation and functioning on a variety
of outcome measures, including behavioural disintegration (Li and Hambrick 2005), team
identifcation (Salk and Shenkar 2001), alliance proftability (Luo 2005) and JV performance
(López-Navarro and Camisón-Zornoza 2003), were examined.The forming stage pertains to
the early stages of alliance team development.This stage is critical as the architectural foundation of the team is established, which comprises input variables that explain how teams
Alliance teams
341
TABLE 22.2 Alliance team management
Perspective
Point of attention
Example
Composition
Team diversity may accentuate ‘us-vsthem’ perceptions and enforce factions,
or diversity may function as a basis for
informational synergies.

A joint venture board composed
of members with heterogeneous
functional backgrounds and experiences
invokes constructive decision making.

Coordination
To obtain effective team coordination,
a team leader should set team tasks,
organize decision making, stimulate
participation and create incentives.

Goal clarity, task interdependency and
strong team leadership in a R&D team
enhances joint learning, knowledge
sharing and overall team effectiveness.

Identifcation
Team members identify with the team,
the alliance or their organization;
identifcation may stimulate or impede
intra-team collaboration and team
effectiveness.

Strong identifcation by a steering
committee member with his/her
individual organization may lead to
decisions that favour partner interests
over collective interests.

Relational
Relational practices in the form of intrateam cooperation, communication and
confict resolution strengthen the social
fabric of an alliance team and positively
affect team effectiveness.

Distrust in an operational team
inhibits the progress of joint work,
invokes opportunistic acts and
undermines the team’s ability to attain
its goals.

Goal hierarchy
A clear goal hierarchy aligns proximate
alliance team goals with distal alliance
objectives, such that it enables alliance
leadership to set team tasks and organize
activity sequencing.

Alignment between joint design,
manufacturing and marketing teams
with regard to tasks and goals enables
the partners to successfully develop and
market an innovative product or service.

Multi-team
membership
Multi-team membership may be used as
a stabilizing governance mechanism as
it promotes multi-tasking, productivity
and learning; though it demands team
members capable to work under high
pressure.

When an alliance manager is involved
in each stage of alliance development
(e.g. strategizing, negotiation,
execution and management), the social
fabric of the alliance is strengthened
over time.

Hand-offs
The timing, quality and accuracy of
between-team hand-offs are critical to
attain team goals and, more importantly,
to accomplish alliance objectives.

Organizing a hand-off between the
negotiation and the launch team
secures that strategic intent is clear,
formal agreements are correctly
installed and constructive relational
practices are continued.

Stand-alone
Multi-team system
operate and perform. Following the forming stage, alliance teams proceed to the functioning
stage. In this stage, the team becomes operational and hence the focus shifts from designing
the team to actual team functioning and processes. Next, we detail team composition and
coordination as critical forming conditions and identifcation and relational practices as functioning processes.

342
Alliance teams
Team composition is one of the most expansive research topics to date on alliance teams.
Diversity is inherently part of alliance teams as team members bring distinct demographics,
experiences, cultural values and backgrounds to the alliance team. Studies draw on social
categorization theory to point out that team members act as representatives for organizations
which they are loyal to and identify with because these organizations provide them with
safety, and they are familiar with them (e.g. Li et al. 2015). Based on a series of interviews,
Li and Xin propose that international joint venture (IJV) team members’ identifcation with
their parent organization leads to factionalism, which negatively affects communication, commitment and alliance performance. Li and Hambrick (2005) coined the concept of factional
groups to capture these phenomena and report that demographic fault lines between factions
(i.e. delegate groups) engender task confict, emotional confict and behavioural disintegration. In contrast, technical competence, the ability to cope with ambiguity and the cooperative disposition of individuals in alliance teams can increase a team’s social cohesion.Together
these studies suggest that alliance teams easily break down into conficting subgroups, factions
or coalitions that inhibit the team to accomplish its tasks.
Coordination and control in the context of alliance teams is extremely prevalent because
the coordination of alliance activities occurs in the absence of structures and systems available
in conventional organizational contexts (Zoogah et al. 2011). Although across hierarchical
levels coordination activities may vary, coordination tends to focus on task setting, decisionmaking, participation and incentives. To be effective, alliance teams need to have clear tasks.
In a study of JV management teams, Adobor (2004) fnds that task complexity negatively
impacts the evolution of the team but also that goal clarity and mandate of the JV management team increases team effectiveness. Pearce (2001) fnds that task interdependence not
only diminishes the effect of factionalism on hard infuence tactics but also stimulates team
members to use persuasion, consultation, coalition and legitimating tactics. Decision making
in alliance teams entails clear procedures about who has the authority to make decisions. For
example, board members’ decisions pertain to budgeting and staffng, whereas management
team members focus on project prioritization and budgets. Reuer et al. (2014) recognize the
coordinative function of joint venture boards and report that involvement by the IJV board
can be benefcial when the partners are engaged in collaborative R&D activities that tend to
be subject to contractual incompleteness as well as opportunism.With regard to participation,
team coordination entails the instalment of integrative mechanisms between team members,
such as initiating direct contact between executives and initiating socialization processes (e.g.
training and meetings). The goal is to obtain commitment and involve team members in
planning and performance management. Incentives to team members, such as economic and
career development paths, depict a control mechanism to steer team members’ behaviour
towards attainment of team tasks. Economic incentive alignment between representatives is
a necessary condition for alliances to succeed, with an uneven alliance beneft for partners
resulting in less success (Agarwal et al. 2010). In addition, team level rewards (as opposed individual level) tend to increase joint venture team effectiveness (Adobor 2004).Taken together,
effective teams depend on team managers’ ability to reduce parent companies’ uncertainty and
solve incentive and coordination problems, an effect that is reinforced if (JV) managers have
more decision-making autonomy (López-Navarro and Camisón-Zornoza 2003).
In the setting of an alliance team, a team member may identify with the alliance team,
the alliance, the organization or even the team within the partner that they represent.Team
members’ identifcation is a critical driver of team processes, such that identifcation with factions in the alliance team can lead to team conficts and team disintegration (Li and Hambrick
Alliance teams
343
2005). Identifcation received specifc attention in studies investigating teams in international
joint ventures where nationality and organizational boundaries depict strong identifers (Li
et al. 2002; Salk and Shenkar 2001). In a study of a Japanese–German joint venture, Salk and
Brannen (2000) found that nationality is an important antecedent of individual infuence in
the joint venture, such that ingroup–outgroup discrimination persisted despite convergence
of shared norms. Reporting on a case study of an international joint venture, Salk and Shenkar (2001) unravelled that subgroup boundaries may exist, organized along cultural values (i.e.
British–Italian), parent differences (i.e. frm origin) and parent–IJV. The results indicate that
national-based subgroups persisted as the IJV progressed, despite structural and contextual
offsetting mechanisms (e.g. language and resource dependence).Taken together, identifcation
depicts a critical sense-making vehicle in alliance teams. Perceived similarity, proximity, shared
goals and common perceived enemies or threats affect identifcation with a team.
As alliance team members interact, a variety of relational practices may unfold that directly
affect team and possibly alliance outcomes.Team members initiate and engage in collaborative
processes to pursue shared or complementary goals. This form of team cooperation is often
characterized by intensive communication, trust building and socialization practices between
team members. Cooperation tends to improve when team members work together under nonbinding contracts when compared to binding contracts (Malhotra and Murnighan 2002), and
cooperation (in JV teams) tends to result in improved alliance performance ratings (Luo and
Park 2004).Alliance team studies also reported on the positive effects of intra-team communication and how communication mitigates barriers to team effectiveness. For example,Agarwal
and colleagues (2010) report that intra-team communication reinforces the positive effect of
economic incentives alignment between team members on team performance. Rockmann and
colleagues (2007) show that rich communication reinforces team identifcation, specifcally if
team members do not strongly identify with their own organizations. Informal socialization
mechanisms, such as communication guidelines and social events, can further aid information
sharing between team members. Conficts are part of alliance teams and may endanger alliance
team effectiveness (Lumineau et al. 2015). For example, Li and Hambrick (2005), investigating
joint venture management teams, report that emotional and task conficts both result from
factional fault lines but that only emotional conficts negatively affect subsequent behavioural
disintegration and alliance performance. Agreement exists in the alliance team literature that
conficts form an integral part of alliance teams, however, depending on how they are managed
(see Box 22.2), conficts may be formidable partners or dangerous adversaries.

BOX 22.2 ALLIANCE TEAM LEADERSHIP
One recurring theme across alliance team research pertains to the role alliance team
leadership fulfls in driving team functioning and efectiveness. For example, focusing
on diversity, studies show how team leadership may resolve diversity challenges (Li
et al. 1999); focusing on ambiguity, studies show how leadership enables knowledge
sharing and creativity (Gu et al. 2018); and focusing on connectivity, studies show
how team leadership shapes social networks across team boundaries (Bjørkeng et al.
2009). Regarding diversity, when team members consider themselves part of an ingroup, and thus strongly identify with team members in the alliance team, they are
344
Alliance teams
more likely to unify and pursue activities favouring team efectiveness. Efective team
leadership then requires team leaders to focus on leadership practices aimed to reinforce a relational identity in support of collective behaviours, enabling team members
to capture synergies originating in their diverse backgrounds. By contrast, when team
members consider themselves part of out-groups, and thus strongly identify with their
(organizational) sub-groups, the alliance team is prone to polarization and behavioural
disintegration. Efective team leadership then rests on the ability to construct an intergroup relational identity across organizational boundaries. Such leadership practices
ensure that all team members’ interests are recognized and all team members are treated
respectfully and fairly, thus advancing team efectiveness. To resolve (goal) ambiguity,
leadership practices in an alliance team may seek to reinforce the efects of formal and/
or relational governance mechanisms. Formal governance, such as contracts, procedures and incentives, provides coordination and control to the team, enabling team
members to collectively work towards goals. Efective leadership then reinforces the
formalized team structure and is more likely to be centralized and task-driven. In
contrast, relational governance, such as trust-building, knowledge sharing and socialization, invites team members to collectively make sense of team processes and goals.
Efective leadership practices invest then in enhancing the social fabric of team and are
more likely to enhance team process through decentralized and person-driven leadership practices. Taken together, a wide-range of leadership practices can be efective, but
the applicability depends on alliance team objectives and composition.
Sources: Hogg et al. (2012); Kramer et al. (2019); Smith et al. (2018); van der Kamp
et al. (2022).

Alliance team: a multi-team system perspective
A multi-team system perspective proffers that organizational arrangements, such as alliance
relationships, are best described as organizational collectives that consist of two or more teams
that interface directly and interdependently to accomplish collective goals (Zaccaro et al.
2012). The system’s boundaries are defned by virtue of the fact that all teams within the
system, while pursuing different proximal goals, share at least one common distal goal and, in
doing so, exhibit input, process and outcome interdependence with at least one other team in
the system (Marks and Luvison 2012). For example, within an alliance, multiple teams simultaneously work on specifc team tasks, such as product innovation, setting-up manufacturing
and coordinating distribution channels, to accomplish an overarching alliance objective: the
commoditization of a new product. In alliance arrangements, team members thus continuously shift attention between team and cross-team activities, which in combination with the
strong interdependencies between teams, infuences not only their team outcomes but also
the extent to which the alliance attains its objectives (Luvison and Marks 2013). As visualized in Figure 22.1, with the introduction of the multi-team system perspective, three topics
deserve attention: goal hierarchy, hand-offs and multi-team membership.
Establishing a goal hierarchy and sequencing of interdependent team activities represents
a fruitful manner to orchestrate performance in alliance arrangements. A goal hierarchy is an
overview of team goals that ensures that all teams pursue goals that align with the common
Alliance teams
Partner A
Alliance
Partner B
Executive board
Joint
executive board
Executive board
Alliance
management team
Steering
committee
Alliance
management team
Organizational
teams
Joint
working groups
Organizational
teams
Procurement
Research & Development
Manufacturing
Marketing/Sales
Legal / Finance
…..

FIGURE 22.1
Joint legal
team
Joint sales
team
Joint purchase
team
Joint design
team
345
Procurement
Research & Development
Manufacturing
Marketing/Sales
Legal / Finance
…..

Alliance multi-team system
alliance objective. In building a goal hierarchy, it is important to consider that the overarching alliance objective can be different from objectives set by the individual partners. As such,
an effective goal hierarchy comprises alignment between team goals, partner frm goals and
alliance objectives. Consider an example.Two frms forged an alliance to develop and market
a new product. A goal hierarchy frst specifes the overarching alliance objective—increase
market share and proftability by launching an innovative product. Then, derived from the
overarching objective, specifc individual team goals are formulated, which may include new
product development for the R&D team, setting up equipment for the engineering team and
developing and negotiating access to a new distribution channel for the sales team. In a perfect
world, these teams may work perfectly together; however, without a clear goal hierarchy, interteam adversities are likely to emerge.The R&D team may develop a high-end product, which
the sales team views as unmarketable and which according to the engineers is too expensive
to mass produce. A goal hierarchy prevents a waste of resources as it enables management to
prioritize and sequence team tasks and activities in such a way that alliance objectives are
attained effciently and effectively. Another important implication of establishing a goal hierarchy is that performance trade-offs become explicit. A performance trade-off implies that
although teams in a multi-team system are collaboratively working towards an overarching
objective, simultaneously they are competing for the time, resources and funding required to
attain their team goals. Explicating and resolving these performance trade-offs is critical.This
is because the presence of trade-offs implies that temporary team under-performance may be
accepted for the greater good: superior alliance performance. For example, in the previous
example, priority could have been given to the marketing and sales team to better understand
customer requirements, which implies that the R&D and engineering teams were asked to
postpone their activities. Although empirical evidence is lacking, it is reasonable to assume
346
Alliance teams
that misspecifcation of goal hierarchies and task sequencing (i.e. lack of coordination) depicts
a cause of alliance instability and under-performance.
Understanding the complexities surrounding hand-offs becomes explicit with a multiteam system perspective.Whereas within-team hand-offs are required when team members are
replaced or work is divided among team members, between-team hand-offs facilitate the transfer
and completion of tasks in multi-team systems.These between-team hand-offs are even more
complex in alliance arrangements as multiple and different teams over time are critical to alliance
progress, and it is the quality of the hand-offs that determines whether alliance objectives are
attained (Luvison and Marks 2013). For example, as management pushes for progress but does
not provide a feasible time planning, it may occur that a R&D team provides the engineering
team with erroneous product specifcations too late.Across-team hand-offs potentially work like
the childhood game of ‘Chinese whispers’ in which errors accumulate as hand-offs become less
accurate over time. Moreover, when some teams exit and others remain, the required hand-off
knowledge often remains implicit or assumed by remaining teams. Also, the knowledge and
expertise of different teams (regarding hierarchical level and task) makes hand-offs more diffcult
because team members often use jargon and approach the task from their own perspectives.
By viewing alliance arrangements as multi-team systems, the issue of multi-team membership also becomes salient (Boyer O’Leary et al. 2012). While teams are often considered
stable in their team membership, in most alliances, representatives take part in multiple teams,
and alliance staff thus may be assigned to multiple teams, over time, across hierarchy and
with different tasks. An engineer, for example, can be part of the alliance negotiation team
and provide input about operations, can be part of the engineering team working on a new
product, can be part of the management team as he/she operates at management level and
could be involved in other operational teams. Multiple team membership enables advantages
such as multi-tasking, increased productivity and learning.Take how marketers, for example,
often have knowledge about business development that enables them to take up some business development tasks, enabling a smoother workfow and shorter throughput time, while
on the fip side there might be a conficting interest with other team goals. Team members
with multiple team memberships, however, may face diffculties such as with spreading their
time and attention among teams, scheduling and the required discipline to make it all work.
Taken together, the stand-alone perspective emphasizes that alliance teams function as a critical
coordination mechanism necessary to steer alliances towards their objectives. Forming conditions
and team functioning are critical, but how each alliance team interacts with other teams as part of
the multi-team system also represents an important driver of alliance stability and performance.
Coordinating alliance teams, alone or as part of a system, therefore necessitates strong boundary
agents. Boundary agents in an alliance arrangement play a critical role in the development of a
common understanding within and across teams; these agents often initiate the development
of shared social meaning across alliance team members (Drach-Zahavy 2011).They gather and
interpret information from the partners and transfer their interpretation to other representatives.
In addition, they aid alliance leadership in building and maintaining strong ties between teams
and partner organizations, ties critical to initiate knowledge, information and resources fows.

Alliance teams: decision-making steps
To steer an alliance arrangement towards its short- and long-term objectives, strong alliance
leadership establishes and orchestrates a network of interdependent teams. Moreover, it continuously needs to shift between the individual, team and organizational level in the alliance
Alliance teams
1
Assemble
alliance teams
347
Determine number and nature of alliance teams; set alliance team
tasks, goals and position within the alliance hierarchy.
Select and appoint team members with required skill set and
experience, while considering pros and cons of team diversity.

2
Design alliance
team governance
Install multi-team system governance, including goal hierarchy, handoff and multi -team membership, to align and organize teams.
Install intra-team governance, including coordination and relational,
to help teams to attain team goal and contribute to alliance objective.

3
Execute and evaluate
alliance teams
Pay continuous attention to team execution as, depending on the
alliance development stage, teams are created, changed and ended.
Assess team performance and, based on the result, propose changes or
end it, while considering its interdependencies with other teams.

FIGURE 22.2
Decision-making steps: alliance teams
and exhibit strong multi-team leadership. In order to provide guidelines for successfully using
teams as the alliance relationship progresses, the next section elaborates on specifc decisions
for alliance teams at each stage of the alliance development framework (see Figure 22.2).

Step 1: assemble alliance teams
When a frm forges an alliance relationship, among the frst critical tasks is to determine the
required number of alliance teams, the task for each alliance team and to designate the hierarchical level at which the team operates. A distinction between pre-formation, formation
and management activities could be helpful in designing the team governance structure.With
regard to pre-formation activities, a frm may set up a team (or alliance function) to explore
alliance opportunities and coordinate the portfolio of alliance relationships (see Chapter 23),
whereas the top-management team, as part of their job, may champion various alliance initiatives. During the formation stage, partners’ negotiation teams interact and lay the foundation
for the alliance, whereas launch teams take over and are responsible for alliance execution.
Once operational, alliance management teams become responsible for coordinating resource
exchange, knowledge transfer and political manoeuvring across organizational boundaries.As
part of their task, this team may coordinate and align the activities of multiple project teams
or working groups. Documenting team governance could be benefcial as it allows alliance
leadership to proactively deal with changes in team membership, caused by alliance development transitions (e.g. from formation to management), under-performance (e.g. team member replacement) and task completion (e.g. intended dissolution).
Each alliance team has a specifc task, and delegate selection constitutes a critical activity
as the people staffng an alliance team form a major input factor that affects team processes
and outcomes. In general, partners should select and appoint team members with the required
skill set and experience for the task at hand. For example, the negotiation team may include
skilled negotiators, senior alliance managers, operational managers and juridical and fnancial
advisors.The launch team may comprise savvy alliance managers with experience in alliance
and change management and a deep understanding of the partner organizations. Accounting
for diversity is important as, on the one hand, alliance teams, across hierarchical levels, may
348
Alliance teams
break into subgroups, and on the other hand, diversity between team members may facilitate information exchange and creativity. Representative selection may thus, in addition to
personal skills and experiences, focus on a team member’s ability to work in factional teams.

Step 2: design alliance team governance
Alliance team governance entails the design of the multi-team system as well as the design
of the different alliance teams. With regard to the design of the multi-team system, alliance
leadership’s main task is to establish a governance structure that contributes to alliance stability
and enables the partners to accomplish their objectives.To this end, the frst task is to establish
a goal hierarchy, which represents an overview of the alliance objectives, derived sub-goals
per team and insight into how the attainment of these goals is interdependent. Specifcally, a
goal hierarchy explicates the sequencing of activities between teams and thus allows alliance
management to organize smooth hand-offs.Without a clear hand-off between teams, alliance
processes are likely to become obstructed. One way to organize hand-offs is to formalize
multi-team membership, which allows team members to create alignment between team tasks
and processes.
With regard to intra-team governance, formal and relational coordination mechanisms
help teams to attain goals and allow them to make their contribution to alliance objectives. Specifcally, team managers must carefully choose team members who will match their
counterparts in the partnering organization in rank and experience. Asymmetry in decisionmaking authority (e.g. seasoned senior versus less experienced junior managers) may inhibit
decision-making speed and also function as a signal of low commitment. In addition to formal
governance, it is imperative to develop and build the social fabric of the team. Early communications between team members tend to be frequent and intense, yet occasionally issues are
confusing.To build social ties and stimulate joint sense making, team-building sessions, feld
trips and other social activities should be organized.

Step 3: execute and evaluate alliance teams
Given the plethora of teams involved in an alliance arrangement, alliance leadership should
pay continuous attention to team execution. During each alliance development stage, teams
are created, changed and dissolved. Team execution is thus a continuous and dynamic process with multiple potential hazards. During team execution, hand-off and transition hazards
may emerge that demand quick resolutions. For example, once negotiations are successfully
concluded, negotiation teams need to provide the (joint) launch team with all relevant information; procrastination, neglecting to provide information about relational quality or forgetting to explain important contractual details may all impede a smooth alliance execution.
Similarly, steering committees may withhold information from operational teams, direction
and resources. As the alliance progresses, it becomes more likely that critical interpersonal
links between team members are built, which can be broken as delegates change positions or
jobs. A decision to reassign personnel that makes sense from a partner frm’s perspective can
infict severe penalties and trigger a major setback to an alliance. Dismantling a team, intended
or unintended, may also undermine alliance progress as the social fabric of the alliance is
changed.Thus, to achieve alliance objectives, well-integrated communication and workfows
among managers and teams within and across frms are required.

Alliance teams
349
Team leaders are expected to assess team performance and, based on the result, propose
changes, while considering its relationship with other teams. For example, without clear product specifcations, engineering teams cannot set up production lines. In other words, underperformance of the engineering team could be caused by intra-team conditions, but poor
performance may also result from mismanagement of the interdependencies between teams.
The alliance management team therefore should not only receive reports on team performance, but it should also conduct a regular audit of evolving social, work and communication
ties within and between teams as it is valuable for managers to gauge the health of the alliance and spot problem areas. It is their responsibility that the multi-team system functions.As
such, a generic performance metric system should be extended with metrics capturing team
performance (tailored to the specifc team) and metrics capturing processes and outcomes
pertaining to the multi-team system.

Summary
The ‘alliance team’ does not exist. Within alliance arrangements, multiple teams interact in
a multi-team system spanning across hierarchical levels and over time. The development of
an alliance entails continual changes in the composition of teams because of part-time team
members, team-member turnover and teams that are only involved in the alliance for a specifc short-term task.To attain alliance objectives, alliance leadership therefore should direct its
attention to the composition and functioning of various teams involved in an alliance arrangement. In addition, alliance leadership needs to consider that teams in an alliance arrangement
operate in a network of interdependent teams, such that the accomplishment of more distal
alliance objectives originates in alliance teams attaining more proximate team goals.

CASE: DUTCH OPTICS CENTRE2
In October 2016, the Dutch Organization for Applied Sciences (TNO) and the Technical
University of Delft (TU Delft) signed an alliance agreement for the initiation of Dutch Optic
Centre (DOC). Against the background of internal development at TNO (for example, stagnation of fnancing existing RD activities in this feld) and external development (such as
SMEs’ need to get affordable access to fundamental knowledge to realize their product
innovation, and increased use of feld labs and government pressure to do more in public–
private partnerships), TNO decided to explore the possibilities of realizing their ambition by
setting the DOC alliance together with TU Delft.
The DOC aims to boost Dutch industry in the feld of optics and opto-mechatronics by
increasing the utilization of Dutch science through joint R&D. The Netherlands is unmatched
in the feld of optics and opto-mechatronics, holding a leading position in science and industry. The DOC is an innovation-oriented alliance consisting of knowledge institutes and more
than 20 hi-tech companies from all over the Netherlands. The objective of DOC is to become
an ambitious public–private partnership in the feld of optics and opto-mechatronics by
2020. It strives to realize three objectives. The frst is to develop (fundamental) knowledge
focused on the long-term needs of companies. Second, it seeks to support and collaborate
with companies to develop new products up to the highest technology readiness level and
to introduce products on the markets. Finally, DOC aims to promote the DOC brand in
350
Alliance teams
order to attract new R&D partners and also create an interesting environment for students
and PhDs. TNO and TU Delft fulfl the leadership role and will be guided by the needs of the
industry.
Before focusing on the functioning of the alliance set-up team, we will briefy explain the
set-up process. In 2014, TNO started the process of setting up the DOC alliance. The period
between 2014 and the start of 2016 can be characterized as the exploration phase. TNO
and TU Delft explored the possibilities of creating a viable DOC alliance. This was done by
holding meetings with internal and external stakeholders such as SMEs and the Ministry of
Economic Affairs. During that period, more and more people started to believe in the power
of concepts like feld labs, test beds, ecosystem thinking and joint innovation centres. This
fostered the creation of a viable DOC alliance. Between the start of 2016 and October of that
year, the alliance set-up team created a DOC website, defned the set of potential products/
service of the alliance, organized two network meetings with SMEs, aligned the interests of
the Ministry of Economic Affairs and RVO with those of the DOC alliance partners and other
stakeholders (such as SMEs), and developed a DOC business plan and a contract supported
by top management of each partner. This resulted in the signing of a DOC alliance agreement on 19 October 2016.
An alliance formation team was created in early 2014, led by the managing director of
TNO industry and a full professor and head of the Optics Research Group at TU Delft. The
objective of this team was to create a feasible and executable DOC business plan, including
a business model (cost–revenue structure), an assigned collaboration agreement and the
frst step in the execution (for example, a website and initial projects with SMEs).
This team consists of a research manager of expertise and a business developer from
TNO, and a professor and some members of the valorization centre of TU Delft. Both organizations put someone in place with knowledge of this feld of expertise, as well as someone who is external and more business-oriented. The employees of TNO and TU Delft had
worked together for a long period of time and therefore had a good understanding of each
other’s interests and capabilities. This helped the process of creating a common ambition
and plan. Moreover, the set-up team was located in the same building, which supported
communication between the members: a lot of informal, face-to-face communication. They
spoke to each other frequently (almost daily) and held a meeting every Friday to discuss
progress and set new actions.
At the beginning of 2016, a new person entered the alliance set-up team. This person was
also externally oriented and pragmatic but also more entrepreneurially oriented and had no
background in this feld of knowledge and no prior collaboration experience with the individuals from TU Delft. This had consequences for the team dynamic. For example, there was
uncertainty about whether this person understood the interests of the other organization
well enough. This resulted in constructive debate but also conficts, which were resolved as
alliance preparations continued.
The basic attitude of alliance team members was pragmatic; that is, it was not about making plans frst and then doing, but more about ‘thinking–doing’ and dealing with obstacles
as they appeared. The advantage of this mindset was that they made a lot of progress in
terms of making plans and actions (examples included constructing a website, defning frst
projects inclusive of SME partners, and fnding funding). Because of this, higher management saw the immediate consequences of setting up this alliance. This provided energy but
also internal friction and questions. For instance: is this what we want, for example, working
on a higher technology readiness level than we used to do? What is the relationship between
Alliance teams
351
my ‘technology road map’ and the roadmap of the alliance? Is this suffciently aligned?
What does it mean for the relationship between TNO and SMEs and for the DOC alliance and
their stakeholders (also including SMEs)? Would we cannibalize our own initiatives or not?
In order to acquire and maintain support from their own organizations, the alliance setup
team communicates frequently, via a newsletter, to their internal stakeholders regarding the
status, actions and questions concerning DOC. This helps the team to speed up the progress, and the internal organization feels that they have to be alert; otherwise, the situation
is set. The fact that more internal people see consequences (both positive and negative) of
this alliance for their work also creates internal tensions. Moreover, TNO has a unique (legal)
position in the market and is still learning how to collaborate with external partners within
the legal framework.
Finally, the collaboration agreement was created with support from the legal department
at TNO as well as TU Delft and signed by the chief executive offcer of TNO and the rector
magnifcus of TU Delft. Moreover, a detailed business plan and business model has been
developed. From July till October 2017, DOC alliance transitioned to a fully operational
arrangement. This is the result of this team, with support of management of TNO and TU
Delft, and great help from the various secretaries and legal support. Since then, the DOC
alliance has broadened it scope and developed activities in the area of agri food, energy
and environment, health, ICT and manufacturing. In addition, the DOC offers training and
education, bringing together academic and industrial partners.

Questions
1
2
The team representatives of TNO and TU Delft were primarily focused on continuing to
make progress. They did take a little time to engage in team building. Explain why team
building during the (pre)launch stage is critical to overcome post-launch impediments
to alliance development.
Team composition changed over time as a new team member was added to the (pre)
launch team. Explain how team composition (and team-member skills) may afect alliance launch team functioning and how changes in team membership may positively or
negatively afect team functioning.

Notes
1 We acknowledge Martijn van der Kamp for his contribution to this chapter.
2 Interview with a senior executive of TNO; for more information see: www.dutchopticscentre.com/
23
ALLIANCE CAPABILITIES
A frm’s alliance capability refers to its ability to design, manage and terminate alliances successfully. An alliance capability thus can enhance the overall performance of a frm’s alliances
in that it enables the frm to purposefully create, extend or modify the routines it uses to
inform its alliance decision making. Firms develop alliance capabilities over time, but they
also tend to capture only minimal knowledge or develop just a few best practices. In an environment with few alliances, such an ad hoc approach may be effective; however, the increasing importance of alliances implies that an unstructured approach will ultimately produce
frustrating, unsatisfactory results. In contrast, a structured approach that embeds the alliance
capability in the organizational design, culture and minds of employees enables the frm to
build and deploy its expansive alliance capabilities more effectively.To adopt such a structured
approach, alliance managers frst need to understand what alliance capabilities are (frst section) before they can gain insights into capability building and deployment (second section).
In the next two sections we provide a systematic framework with a set of decision-making
steps regarding alliance capabilities and a summary.We conclude with a case illustration.

The meaning of alliance capabilities
One of the main factors contributing to strong alliance performance is the development of
specifc managerial routines to address (sets of) alliances—that is, a frm’s alliance capability
(Kale and Singh 2007). Extant studies have shown that building, possessing and deploying such
an alliance capability enables frms, compared to peers without an alliance capability, to better
generate and appropriate value from their alliance arrangements. One set of studies focused on
‘learning from alliances’ and explored the effects of alliance experience. In general, these studies show that having forged alliances in the past positively affects the performance of future
alliances (Liu and Ravichandran 2015; Simonin 1997). Lee et al. (2015), for example, show
that frms with more alliance experience are better able to protect their interests under any
given alliance structure, making the choice of structure less consequential to them.Ariño et al.
(2014) show that the length of prior relationships has a U-shaped effect on negotiation time,
suggesting that partner frms learn from prior encounters. Pangarkar (2009) demonstrates
that frms that have experienced prior terminations are less likely to have their future alliance
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-23
Alliance capabilities
353
dissolved as prior termination experiences will enable them to design better alliances and
adopt more appropriate alliance management strategies. Some studies distinguished between
generic and partner-specifc experiences (Zollo et al. 2002). Rahman and Korn (2014) demonstrate positive performance consequences, such that generic alliance experience breeds
dynamic routines, which facilitate better alliance management and increased the likelihood of
alliance survival, whereas partner-specifc experience substitutes for coordination and control
mechanisms as prior encounters generate trust and promote learning from past mistakes.
Extending beyond the effect of experience, other studies focus on institutionalization of
alliance practices. In general, these studies report positive effects of alliance capabilities on
alliance and alliance portfolio performance (Heimeriks and Duysters 2007; Heimeriks et al.
2009). For example, Zheng and Yang (2015) demonstrate that the benefts and liabilities of
inter-organizational routines, arising from alliance partner repeatedness at a frm’s alliance
portfolio level, lead to an inverted U-shaped relationship between alliance partner repeatedness and breakthrough innovations. de Man and Luvison (2014) report that an alliancesupportive culture was found to mediate the relationship between alliance experience and
performance, suggesting that experience with alliances leads to better alliance performance
when this experience is institutionalized into the organizational culture.
Taken together, with alliance capabilities, frms can standardize and optimize the partner
selection process, then make appropriate alliance design and management decisions.A highly
developed alliance capability also assists frms in choosing performance indicators that are
consistent with their specifc alliance strategy, then evaluate and, if needed, terminate underperforming alliances while still ensuring favourable outcomes. In addition to augmenting
the performance of bilateral alliance arrangements, alliance capabilities may enable a frm to
optimize alliance portfolio design and coordination (Haider and Mariotti 2016). Beyond the
direct effect of alliance capabilities, frms also vary in their degree of capability, such that those
with superior competences have a competitive edge over their peers (see e.g. Bouncken and
Fredrich 2016; Simonin 1997). To comprehend the performance implications of possessing
alliance capabilities, and their varying levels, it becomes important to distinguish between
(1) alliance capability routines and (2) alliance capability instruments.

Alliance capability routines
The dynamic capability view (Teece et al. 1997) suggests that alliance capabilities constitute a
set of managerial routines designed to improve frm performance by optimizing the governance of its alliance.Thus routines relate to the governance of a single alliance, in the form of
coordination and transformation routines, or else target the management of a frm’s alliance
portfolio through alliance proactiveness and alliance portfolio coordination.
Alliance coordination routines coordinate activities and resources with a specifc alliance
partner (Schilke and Goerzen 2010).They thus provide frms with the ability to formulate an
alliance strategy, select an alliance partner, negotiate and design an effcient structure and then
manage, evaluate and terminate that specifc alliance. If a frm possesses alliance coordination
routines, it will also have developed a standardized approach to guide and inform its decisions
about each new alliance. Each alliance development stage demands different alliance capabilities, but their coordination routines enable frms to deal readily with potential deal breakers as
the alliance progresses. For example, the routines might centre on developing partner profles,
building long and short lists of potential partners and formulating a partner ft framework to
support partner ft analyses. In contrast, in the alliance management stage, the routines pertain
354 Alliance capabilities
to the frm’s ability to coordinate, communicate and bond with its counterpart (Schreiner
et al. 2009).Thus they ensure that any single alliance is governed as effciently as possible and
that the legitimacy of the transaction is maximized.
Alliance transformation routines instead pertain to a frm’s ability to modify alliances over
the course of the alliance process (Niederkofer 1991).Where alliance coordination routines
inform decision making, transformation routines refect the recognition that it is unrealistic
to expect a perfect ft between partners from the very beginning (Schilke and Goerzen 2010).
Interaction and adaptation between partners are prerequisites as the alliance develops for
establishing and maintaining high partner ft; the transformation routines include contract
amendments, fuctuations in alliance-related personnel or changes in alliance-related governance mechanisms that encourage such adaptations. Flexibility in alliance design is frequently
mentioned as a critical element of win–win alliances, but transformation routines actually
facilitate frms’ ability to act fexibly and initiate timely corrective measures during the progression of their partnerships.
Alliance proactiveness pertains to a frm’s ability to discover and act on new alliance opportunities before its competitors can (Sarkar et al. 2009); it therefore applies beyond individual
alliances. By institutionalizing sensing routines, frms can readily identify potential partners
and enjoy frst-mover advantages over their competitors. The potential scarcity of suitable
alliance candidates may leave late movers with sub-optimal partnering options; frms with
proactiveness routines enjoy an advantageous position in the market for partners. In a market
with limited high-quality partnering options, routines to identify potentially valuable partnering opportunities constitute a source of strategic advantage.
Finally, the potential interdependencies between individual alliances may enable the frm
to develop routines for coordinating its alliance portfolio. An alliance portfolio coordination
capability helps the frm identify interdependencies, avoid duplicate actions and produce synergies among its individual alliances (Castro and Roldan 2015; Schilke and Goerzen 2010). By
systematically identifying and creating synergies, alliance portfolio coordination can also turn an
alliance portfolio into more than just the sum of its parts.These routines minimize risks by lowering the resource investments needed to achieve gains and diminish conficts across different
relationships in the frm’s alliance portfolio. Supplemental benefts may derive from the frm’s
ability to identify, assimilate and use knowledge within and across alliance partners. Alliance
portfolio coordination also improves the frm’s performance because it implies the coordination
of knowledge across otherwise disconnected alliance partners. Routines and practices targeted
at knowledge management across alliance partners provide frms with a competitive advantage.

Alliance capability instruments
The performance-enhancing qualities of an alliance capability depend not just on routines
(Zollo et al. 2002) or a supportive organizational culture (de Man and Luvison 2014) but also
on the instruments that are at the disposal of the frm (see Table 23.1). An alliance function
refers to all systems of communication, authority and workfow surrounding the alliance.
It identifes the effective and ineffective alliance practices and refnes the experience-based
data to highly useful information. It provides a focal point for capturing and storing alliance
management lessons and best practices, whether in the form of a part- or full-time position
or even a specialized department. Thus, the alliance function serves as a reservoir as well as
a refnery of alliance management knowhow. Firms such as Hewlett-Packard, Eli Lilly and
Philips have established separate organizational units to manage their alliances. The alliance
Alliance capabilities
355
TABLE 23.1 Alliance capability instruments
Instruments
Description
Tools
Alliance function
Specialized support staff offers
(standardized) know-how and knowwhat, contributing to effcient alliance
design, management and assessment.

Alliance department, specialists,
designated top executives,
designated alliance managers,
gatekeepers.

Alliance training
Training and learning enable managers
to identify problems, develop solutions
and implement them skilfully and
responsibly.

Internal training, external training,
alliance handbooks, alliance best
practices, cross-alliance evaluation,
formal learning structures, training
in intercultural management.

Alliance managers
Integrating the function of alliance
managers with human resource
management practices provides alliance
managers with incentives to achieve
excellence.

Management programmes,
competency framework, rewards and
bonuses.

Alliance tools
Developing supportive decision-making
tools helps alliance managers make
better-informed decisions.

Alliance database, intranet,
generic template alliance metrics,
standardized tools, joint business
planning, joint alliance evaluation,
country-specifc management,
partner programmes.

Third parties
Overcoming defciencies in alliance
capabilities by hiring external parties
increases the chances of alliance success.

Consultants, fnancial/legal experts,
mediators for confict resolution.

Sources: Heimeriks and Duysters (2007); Heimeriks et al. (2009).

department thus functions as a link, a coordinator and a bond within the organization that
supports the extensive use and development of alliance capabilities.
Generally an alliance function fulfls fve roles: expert, advisor, knowledge manager, coach
and network facilitator (Kale et al. 2001).The expert role means it identifes potential partners
and governs the ins and outs of the alliance relationships. The advisor role refers to providing line management with expertise, tools and operating procedures and, when necessary,
mediating in alliances that are suffering escalating conficts.The knowledge management role
requires collecting, codifying and communicating alliance best practices. The role of coach
develops and offers training, education and advice to alliance managers and partner frms.
Finally, as a network facilitator, the function initiates gatherings to enable alliance managers to
meet and share experiences. Firms with such an alliance function tend to enjoy superior performance (Dyer et al. 2001). Interestingly, Rahman and Korn (2014) show that the presence of
a formal alliance unit negatively associates with alliance longevity.This is because frms with
a specialized alliance function are better able to manage their alliance arrangements.That is,
such frms are able to quickly assess the usefulness of an alliance, expedite the completion of
alliance tasks, quickly identify under-performance and allocate scarce resources effciently.
Alliance training refers specifcally to managers’ acquisition of the knowledge, skills and
mindset required to perform different activities related to each distinct alliance development
356
Alliance capabilities
stage (Heimeriks et al. 2009). Firms may engage in different forms of training and learning,
including in-house and external alliance training, developing an alliance handbook, crossalliance evaluations or inter-departmental learning. For example, Hewlett-Packard (HP)
developed a two-day course on alliance management, which it offers three times a year.The
company also provides shorter, three-hour courses on alliance management and makes all its
alliance materials available on the internal HP alliance website. Such offerings are not trivial
when it comes to the success of the partnership because alliance governance often does not
come naturally to traditional managers, who prefer decision autonomy.
To effectuate alliance capabilities among alliance managers, frms may develop management development programmes (Lambe et al. 2002) to organize alliance manager competences systematically in a competency framework that also includes reward and bonus systems.
Participating in such programmes enhances managers’ ability to keep track of and coordinate
a vast number of partners, and as alliances grow increasingly important for business, such practical alliance management experience is likely to become a standard criterion for managerial
careers.Thus HP created opportunities for internal networking among its managers, not just
through internal training programmes but also through company-wide alliance summits and
virtual meetings with executives.The company also regularly sends alliance managers to alliance management programmes at various business schools to develop their competences.
The standardized alliance tools that frms might develop include alliance databases,
intranet access, performance metrics and tools tailored to each alliance development stage
(see Table 23.2).The application of alliance tools indicates that frms have codifed and leveraged methodically their alliance knowledge and best practices gained from previous alliances
(Kale and Singh 2007).A database provides access to others’ past experiences, tools, checklists
and information about partners, all of which can support alliance managers in their daily
functions. Hewlett-Packard again offers a prime example: it has developed 60 different tools
and templates, all of which are included in a 300-page manual for decision making in specifc
alliance situations. The manual includes, for example, a template for making a business case
for an alliance, a partner evaluation form, a negotiation template that outlines the roles and
responsibilities of different departments, a list of ways to measure alliance performance and an
alliance termination checklist (Dyer et al. 2001). Such alliance tools not only support managerial decision making but also enhance alliance performance.
Firms may also use third parties, such as consultants, legal/fnancial experts and mediators,
who provide specialized knowledge related to legal issues, confict resolution, fnancing and
alliance governance. Because alliance capabilities foster frms’ alliance (portfolio) performance,
third parties might be helpful for developing and supplementing internal alliance capabilities
(Heimeriks and Duysters 2007). For example, during the alliance design stage, frms are likely
to rely on outside fnancial, legal and alliance specialists to secure their investments. They
often use external fnancial experts to perform due diligence or valuation services, as well
as to give them advice on investment structures. Legal experts might substitute for a frm’s
lack of knowledge regarding contractual agreements, especially if the frm is relatively small.
When conficts arise, external experts can assist in confict resolution by acting as independent
mediators.Thus, access to external knowledge decreases the constraints imposed on frms by a
scarcity of internal resources and enables them to deal better with their capability defciencies.
Overall then, frms with alliance capabilities (i.e. routines and instruments) tend to outperform their peers who lack those capabilities (Niesten and Jolink 2015). In particular, they
experience more positive effects on their stock prices after alliance announcements (Anand
and Khanna 2000), enjoy stronger value creation and proft generation in single alliances
TABLE 23.2 Alliance tools
Alliance strategy
formulation
Alliance launch
Alliance partner
selection
Alliance
negotiation
Alliance design
Alliance
management
Alliance
evaluation
Alliance
termination
Value chain
analysis
Generic alliance
execution
roadmap
Partner
screening form
Negotiation
matrix
Alliance
governance form
guidelines
Alliance
contact list
Generic
performance
metric template
Termination
checklist
Resource need
checklist
(Early)
Healthcheck
diagnosis tool
Partner selection
protocol
Needs-vs-wants
checklist
Alliance contract
template
Alliance
communication
infrastructure
Evaluation form
Termination
planning
work sheet
Resource
vulnerability
checklist
Kick-off
meeting
template
Partner ft
framework
Partner database
Negotiation
procedure
checklist
Negotiation
team checklist
Alliance
management
control guidelines
Trust building
worksheet
Response
strategy
framework
Checklist metric
procedures
Best practice
template
Alliance capabilities
Sources: Dyer et al. (2001); Kale and Singh (2009).

357
358
Alliance capabilities
(Lambe et al. 2002) and achieve higher overall rates of goal achievement (Heimeriks and
Duysters 2007; Ziggers and Tjemkes 2010). Firms with well-established alliance management capabilities are better able to generate relational assets from complementary resources
(Leischnig et al. 2014), whereas institutionalized management processes aimed at coordinating, communicating and bonding the alliance partners positively affects performance at both
alliance and frm levels (Schreiner et al. 2009). Furthermore, processes related to alliance proactiveness, relational governance and strategy or resource coordination by the alliance partners enhance alliance portfolio performance (Sarkar et al. 2009). Most companies engage in
multiple alliances, so a frm’s capability to govern its portfolio of alliances constitutes another
important competitive advantage.

Building and deploying alliance capabilities
Before a frm can deploy its alliance capabilities, it must obtain access to or develop them.
Although frms learn by doing, alliance experience cannot ensure superior alliance performance by itself (Simonin 1997). Lessons must be translated into know-how, which needs to
be actively managed and dispersed throughout the organization (Anand and Khanna 2000).
Alliance learning processes provide a key mechanism for enabling the alliance function to
lead to greater alliance success (Kale and Singh 2007). Deliberate learning mechanisms allow
alliance experience to produce enhanced performance in future alliances (Kale et al. 2002).
Developing alliance capabilities in particular requires four learning mechanisms: (1) capture, (2) codify, (3) communication and (4) coaching (Dyer et al. 2001; Kale and Singh 2007).
Drawing on prior experience with alliance relationships, a frm should initiate activities to
capture its managers’ experiences. For example, debriefng can reveal managers’ tacit knowhow about the design, management and termination of an alliance. Furthermore, a frm might
stimulate the codifcation or recording of experiences by providing guidelines, checklists and
worksheets and encouraging managers to revise them; though working with codifed knowledge appears to be benefcial for the alliance formation and termination stages, its use may be
detrimental during the management stage (Heimeriks et al. 2015). Prescribed templates for
example increase rigour yet reduce relational adaptability.With such codifed knowledge, the
frm can encourage activities that facilitate communication among staff members. Knowledge
sharing in the form of networks and fora contributes to the development of routines and new
insights. Routinization and increasing know-how enable managers to provide coaching that
further diffuses alliance knowledge.When these learning mechanisms are employed simultaneously, alliance capabilities become institutionalized.
However, depending on the number and purposes of the alliances they undertake, frms
might work to achieve varying competence levels (see Table 23.3). A Level 1 competence
suggests that a frm primarily uses a reactive alliance strategy that excludes efforts to build
partnerships.Alliances get stimulated by single champions with limited responsibilities. Initial
alliance management is chaotic and ad hoc; alliance problems get solved as they arise. No
tools support diagnoses or solutions, even if some of these Level 1 frms build on their prior
experience to make decisions.
A Level 2 competence suggests that frms recognize that alliances represent viable growth
alternatives, so they have standardized their important alliance processes. For example, a frm
might have developed a partner ft tool to select the right alliance partner(s) and use it
systematically throughout the organization. In addition, it works to develop its efforts in
different functional areas, such as R&D, production, marketing or distribution. Firm-wide,
Alliance capabilities
359
TABLE 23.3 Alliance capability competence levels
Level 1:Ad hoc
Level 2: Extended
Level 3: Institutionalized
Alliance
Few alliances;
reactive approach
disconnected from
corporate strategy.

Reasonable number of
alliances; alliance are strategic
alternatives; becoming a
partner of choice.

Large number of alliances;
systematic reengineering of
the value chain/ecosystem
to develop and sustain
competitive advantage.

Learning
Non-deliberate and
ad hoc.

Informal knowledge sharing
and codifcation of best
practices.

Creation of knowledge
structure, processes and
routines to build and leverage
alliance capabilities.

Champion
Individual, single
champion with a
vision.

Alliance team, responsible
for capability building and
deployment.

Organization, company-wide
awareness to build and leverage
alliance capabilities.

Authority
Line management.

Middle management.

Top management.

Activities
Legal and fnancial
skills; hands-on tools;
partner selection;
performance
assessment.

Develop alliance community;
standardization of tools
across alliance development
stages; training, best practice
handbook; balanced metrics.

Corporate strategy-driven;
integrate with frm’s strategic
analysis, alliance portfolio
management; alliance function,
alliance programmes; intranet.

Sources: Harbison and Pekar (1998); Pekar and Allio (1994).

management invests in a corporate architecture and strategy, so to some degree, a Level 2 frm
can measure, monitor and perhaps even manage the quality of the alliance process.
A Level 3 competence suggests that frms systematically reengineer the value chain (or
ecosystem) to achieve the close integration of their operational activities.The coherent, integrated alliance strategy gets embedded in the corporate strategy. The frm possesses widespread alliance capabilities and thus can obtain and leverage a competitive advantage through
partnerships. Procedures are standardized, often with dedicated staff that engages in signifcant
sharing to develop best practices. Some repository of knowledge has been established for
future use; alliance knowledge gets periodically disseminated through training and education.
To exploit their alliance knowledge, these frms commit to process discipline; that is, their
alliance processes, methods and tools are well organized and fnely tuned. On this level, alliance management tools are used consistently and developed systemically. At this high level
of alliance maturity, one or more specialists are at work within the organization; with greater
maturity, this specialist takes a greater role, and the criteria for selecting the specialist become
more stringent.
Effective alliance capability building and deploying is conditional on the frms’ need and
ability to forge alliances. Resource allocation decisions must refect the size of the frm and
its tendency to use alliances as a competitive strategy. Moreover, a sole emphasis on possessing
and deploying alliance management capabilities may result in inertia and rigid applications of
tools and templates (Kauppila 2015). Competence levels therefore need to be tailored to alliance requirements. For relatively small frms with few alliances, Level 1 alliance capabilities are
suffcient.To enhance their alliance capability over time, however, these frms might search for
partners with institutionalized alliance capabilities or hire third parties. Relatively large frms
360
Alliance capabilities
with numerous alliances may want to invest to develop a Level 2 competence and eventually
progress to Level 3 because, for them, alliance capabilities constitute a source of signifcant
competitive advantage. Learning implications pertaining to heterogeneity in competence levels are that, (1) to enhance their alliance capability, less-experienced frms may seek to ally with
partners at a higher competence levels, whereas the latter may decide to invest in the former to
enhance the likelihood of alliance success (Howard et al. 2016), and (2) entrepreneurial frms,
often operating at competence level 1, are better off entering a select number of strategic alliances and focusing on enhancing the outcomes of those select alliances as well as developing a
dynamic alliance management capability rather than depending on a small number of alliances
or becoming overwhelmed with a great number of alliances (Moghaddam et al. 2016).

Alliance capabilities: decision-making steps
To develop and use alliance capabilities effectively, frms need a systematic, structured approach
that allows them to consider a variety of issues. For example, frms must decide on the importance of alliance activity for realizing their strategic objectives and consistently organizing
their alliance capabilities. Conditional on this decision, other choices that inform alliance
(portfolio) success follow: the use of advanced management techniques, formalization of procedures, dedicated staff, establishment of knowledge repositories, dedicated alliance functions,
best practices and alliance training. To facilitate these choices, we organize them into three
decision-making steps (see Figure 23.1).

Step 1: alliance capability criticality
To determine the criticality of an alliance capability, frms must understand how and to what
extent their alliances contribute to their competitive advantages. For example, if realizing its
long-term strategy depends primarily on a frm’s autonomous growth, alliances and alliance
capabilities will play a limited role. In contrast, if a frm focuses on its core competences and
perceives alliances as strategic instruments that help it remain competitive and fexible, building and using alliance capabilities becomes critical. In the latter case, alliances are integral to
1
Alliance capability
criticality
Assess the criticality of alliance capabilities; determine the role alliances
play in executing a firm’s strategy taking account of firm size and
industry conditions; determine desired competence level.
Firms operating in industries with widespread alliance activity require a
Level 3 competence.

2
Alliance capability
development
Compare existing alliance capabilities and desired alliance capabilities to
develop an alliance capability development plan.
Invest in routines and tools that improve alliance (portfolio) governance;
invest in learning mechanisms that enable a firm to capture, codify,
communicate and coach alliance best practices.

3
Alliance capability
evaluation
FIGURE 23.1
Assess and monitor alliance development trajectory and, when necessary,
implement corrective measures, including modification of development
goals and approach.
Extend generic performance metrics with metrics tapping into alliance
learning and best practices.

Decision-making steps: alliance capabilities
Alliance capabilities
361
frms’ corporate strategies and embodied in their corporate strategies and policies. That is,
even if modern alliances tend to underpin a frm’s competitive advantage, the actual alliance
capabilities may fulfl three roles:
•
Critical success factor: an alliance capability is a critical success factor if it contributes to
alliance success, but alliances themselves are not key to gaining competitive advantages.
To make these alliances work, frms require a Level 1 alliance competence.
Core competence: an alliance capability constitutes a core competence when the frm
obtains a distinctive competitive position through its smart alliance management. Firms
leverage their alliance capability to outperform that of their competitors; therefore, they
should invest in obtaining Level 2 alliance competence.
Qualifer: in many industries, allying has become so pervasive that it is virtually impossible to operate successfully without alliances—such as the automotive industry with its
manufacturer—supplier dyads, the pharmaceutical industry with its biotechnology links,
and the airline industry with its multi-partner coalitions. Thus an alliance capability is
a prerequisite for frm survival, and failing to attain Level 3 competences will impose a
severe disadvantage on a frm.

•
•
Step 2: alliance capability development
Depending on the criticality of its alliance capabilities, a frm should formulate and execute an
alliance capability development plan. First, it should identify which alliance capability routines
are required to achieve its desired competence level. For example, a frm may develop routines
to optimize the governance of single alliances, such as alliance coordination and transformation routines. It also could invest in alliance portfolio routines, including alliance proactiveness
and alliance portfolio coordination, or it might seek a combination of single and portfolio
alliance routines. Second, the frm should decide which alliance capability instruments are
required: is it really necessary to establish an alliance function (see Box 23.1), offer alliance
training, initiate a management development programme, build alliance tools and source third
parties? Third, by comparing the desired routines and instruments with its existing alliance
capabilities, the frm’s managers can formulate alliance capability development goals and plan
to organize and manage the development trajectory. In other words, managers determine
how to capture experience with existing alliances, codify it, communicate the information
throughout the organization and coach and facilitate appropriate processes.

BOX 23.1 DESIGNING AN ALLIANCE OFFICE
When an alliance ofce is centralized, it often represents an integral part of the frm’s
top management team. The key advantages of centralization include the following:
•
•
•
•
•
Clustered know-how.
Diffusion throughout operational departments.
Development of best practices.
Specialized expertise and routines.
Ongoing repetition of standardized processes.

362
Alliance capabilities
Thus a centralized offce requires senior executive champions, relationship managers,
well-defned tools and practices, consistent and suffcient assistance to business units,
coordination across partners, centralized knowledge, and monitoring and management.
The contributions of a centralized alliance offce to value creation, as perceived by business units, can be limited.
It might be useful instead to consider integrating an alliance offce into the operational structure, such that alliance activity is organized within a business unit, which
reports to headquarters.The key advantages of such decentralization are the following:
•
•
•
•
Integration into the operational/business strategy.
Ability to adapt to local knowledge of customers and partners.
Direct accountability.
Flexibility and speed in design, decision making and execution.

In terms of organizational design, decentralization requires informal cross-linkages,
limited formalization and bureaucracy, and fast decision making. However, it also makes
building and leveraging alliance know-how and know-what across the company more
diffcult.

Step 3: alliance capability evaluation
To sustain effective alliance capability developments, managers must continuously monitor
the development process. Monitoring provides the necessary information to take appropriate actions, whether that means changing alliance capability development goals, altering the
development approach, or organizing and managing the learning processes differently. The
criticality of evaluating alliance-learning processes means that frms often should extend their
alliance performance metric system with indicators that capture the degree to which they
engage in alliance learning and develop and use best practices.
Following the three steps for alliance capability development and deployment does not
provide a clear-cut recipe for instant success, but by adopting these insights, alliance managers
can enhance their frm’s long-term alliance capabilities.

Summary
Firms that possess an alliance capability tend to outperform those that lack institutionalized
alliance know-how and know-what. An alliance capability can enhance the performance
of a frm’s (portfolio of) alliances because it leads to the purposeful creation, extension or
modifcation of the routines and tools that inform alliance decision making. In this context,
routines pertain to alliances and alliance portfolio practices that inform decision making; tools
constitute the instruments that frms can deploy to manage their partnerships. Conditional
on achieving a required level of alliance capabilities—determined by the contribution of the
alliance activity to the frm’s competitive advantage—frms should engage in a more or less
structured approach to build and deploy their alliance capabilities. In short, the frm articulates
a clear alliance strategy that is supported by senior management, establishes a dedicated structure to manage and coordinate alliances, facilitates decision making and learning in alliances,
Alliance capabilities
363
invests in building a culture that encourages growth through alliances and provides training to
create partnership mindsets and skills.To conclude, alliance capabilities are a means to an end.
The various routines, tools and practices are not designed to impose rigid standardization or
corporate dictates, nor should they be objectives in and of themselves. Rather, these practices
are intended to improve management skills.

CASE: PHILIPS1
Founded in 1891 as an electric lamp manufacturer, Royal Philips (Philips) has become a
global player in the consumer electronics, healthcare and lighting industries. Throughout its
successful history, Philips has been known for its innovative capacity to introduce industryand market-changing products. During the late 1990s, Philips engaged increasingly in
various partnerships in its attempts to respond to changing global markets. Alliances with
companies such as Sara Lee, InBev and Nike enabled Philips to create new product categories that fuelled its growth. Philips also forged multiple alliances with similar partners;
companies like Dell, Nokia and Sony were not only Philips customers but also supplied it
with many of their own products and services. To deal with the increasing complexity of its
relationships and take a more structured approach to dealing with them, Philips established
an Alliance Offce: a dedicated department tasked with developing and implementing a
proactive, systematic, company-wide approach to managing alliances.
The Alliance Offce started as a centre of expertise on alliance management and then
became a vehicle for developing, spreading and institutionalizing alliance know-how and
know-what. To prioritize its work, the Alliance Offce classifed Philips’ alliances into four categories, based on the level of synergy with the alliance partner and the alliance’s potential
value. Alliances with low synergy and low potential value represented business alliances,
whereas corporate alliances had high value and high synergy. Philips thus focused initially
on the management of its most important alliances; for each corporate alliance, it assigned a
dedicated alliance manager, created a ‘corporate partner team’ across divisions with executive sponsorship and organized support by the managerial board. This alliance team interacted frequently to exchange information and develop plans for approaching the partner
company.
After enjoying some initial successes, the Alliance Offce moved on to tackle strategic alliances, characterized by their high potential value but little apparent synergy with Philips.
Strategic alliances typically implied the development of a new product or service and thus
demanded high involvement by operational managers. The Alliance Offce refrained from
active alliance management in this case; instead, it offered support for any consideration
of new strategic alliances. Operations and Alliance Offce delegates worked together to
evaluate systematically the business rationales for each alliance and the extent of partner
ft. If the alliance was executed, the Alliance Offce provided support, advice and tools for
managing it.
The Alliance Offce also developed multiple alliance tools to enhance alliance management throughout the organization. For example, its partner selection tool tapped the degree
of partner ft between Philips and any potential partner. The tool emphasized the importance of cultural ft: even if partners contributed complementary resources and shared the
same strategic vision, their alliance could still fail if they simply could not work effectively
together due to the huge or insurmountable differences in their cultures. The alliance offce
364
Alliance capabilities
created other tools for individual managers; for example, a Health Check tool evaluated the
performance of any alliance using both hard and soft metrics. The logic behind all these
tools was not to prescribe decisions but rather to generate systematic analyses, debate and
dialogue to support the decisions that managers must make at every stage of an alliance.
In line with Philips’ decentralized management structure, each alliance was formed and
managed independently by various divisions or businesses. In this setting, however, it was
diffcult to share best practices, which led to some repeated alliance mistakes. Therefore, a
main objective of the Alliance Offce was to institutionalize alliance capabilities and lead the
implementation of systematic processes that would guide alliance management decisions.
In addition to developing routines, providing tools and advocating their use in individual
alliances, the Alliance Offce sought to capture and disseminate knowledge to improve the
competences of alliance managers. To this end, it organized quarterly alliance meetings and
pushed for periodic alliance reviews.
Since establishing the Alliance Offce, Philips has entered into several successful alliances with companies from a variety of industries, including but not limited to fast-moving
consumer goods, telecom, IT and pharmaceuticals. Although initially business managers
resisted asking the Alliance Offce for help, they quickly acknowledged the value it offered to
their business and its performance.

Questions
1
2
To what extent has the structured approach Philips adopted to govern its alliances contributed to its competitive position?
During the establishment of the Alliance Ofce, Philips’ management structure was
decentralized. How might this management structure have impeded and/or reinforced
the efectiveness of the Alliance Ofce?

Note
1 Bell and Lemmens (2007); Bell et al. (2010); Singh et al. (2008).

24
ALLIANCE MINDSET
Organizational complexity within alliance arrangements, derived from the co-occurring and
entanglement of multiple tensions, represents a key characteristic of alliances and a source
of potential collaborative advantage. It is also one of the causes of friction and underperformance.Whereas prior alliance literature emphasized instrumental approaches to deal with
this complexity, one key driver of alliance performance originates in the alliance mindset.
An alliance mindset refers to the frame that alliance managers use to interpret situations and
make decisions. A critical aspect of an alliance mindset pertains to identifying and dealing
with tensions, a practice which is inherently associated with alliance management (frst section).To inform their alliance management decisions, managers must understand the tensions
between cooperation and competition (second section), structure versus process (third section), deliberate versus emergent (fourth section), and corporate versus societal (ffth section).
We conclude this chapter with a summary (sixth section) and a case illustration.

The meaning of alliance mindset
Research in managerial cognition and interpretation has suggested that the job of decision
makers is also one of interpretation (Weick 1979). As interpreters, managers bring a mindset
through which they view the world and translate events into managerial reality. A mindset
helps explain how a manager interprets the world, solves problems and, in particular, manages uncertainty. In other words, an alliance mindset informs the way of thinking that alliance
managers have towards the complex linkages among strategies, structure and systems within
alliance arrangements (Spekman et al. 1998).Traditional approaches towards alliance management promote mindsets that aim for simplicity and consistency; they aim to reduce complexity by advancing ‘linear’ and ‘pre-set’ solutions to deal with the alliance challenges they
encounter (see also Box 24.1). However, a traditional—i.e. instrumental—alliance mindset
blinds alliance managers as it tends to negate the prevalence of tensions in alliance arrangements (Das and Teng 2000a). A non-traditional alliance mindset, in contrast, enables alliance
managers to build and leverage an ability to identify opposing forces, reconcile contradictions (tensions), articulate creative solutions and implement them responsibly and effectively.
Framing alliance challenges as a tension holds promise for alliances managers as dealing with
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-24
366
Alliance mindset
tensions will help managers make sense of an apparently unexplainable and often seemingly
irrational contemporary world (Smith et al. 2018). A tension-informed alliance mindset enables managers to shift between interests and views. Moreover, dealing with contradictory
forces within alliance relationships requires leadership practices that have a focus on seeking
imaginative, reconciliatory solutions that can enable fast-paced, adaptable decision making.
This type of decision guides alliances towards success.
To engage in successful alliance management, managers need to shift their mindsets from
an either/or mindset to a both/and mindset; the latter being a source of creative solutions
(Yin and Jamali 2021). An either/or mindset is associated with a puzzle-solving or a tradeoff frame. As alliance managers adopt the notions of planning and predictability, they assume
a mechanistic worldview. For example, using a partner selection instrument suggests that
partner frms attain superior performance as they choose partners based on appropriate selection criteria (see Chapter 3), or sticking to a contract design template will safeguard partner
frms against contingencies (see Chapter 5). In a mechanistic world, alliances managers put
the pieces of the puzzle together, or resolve a trade-off by allocating resources to one activity (Ryan-Charleton et al. 2022), knowing that a suboptimal resource allocation may have
adverse consequences (De Wit and Meyer 2004). However, alliance managers function in
unpredictable and dynamic environments; they frequently lack information, and instrumental
approaches are ineffective (Tjemkes and Mihalache 2021). A both/and mindset allows alliance managers to operate effectively in situations in which two seemingly contradictory, or
even mutually exclusive, forces appear to be in effect at the same time (De Wit and Meyer
2004). Such a problem that is a tension has no easy solution.Tensions bring about cognitive
and emotional stress experienced by alliance managers, directly resulting from contradictory
yet interrelated elements that persist over time (Ryan-Charleton and Gnyawali 2022). Rather,
resolving a tension requires decisions that aim to achieve one of many possible creative reconciliations of the two opposing forces as there is no logical way to integrate the two opposites into an internally consistent understanding (Poole and van de Ven 1989). Nonetheless,
extending beyond semantics, a tension refers to opposing forces that appear irreconcilable,
although we also argue that such tension may be resolved through intelligent and creative
alliance management (Wit and Meyer 2004).
A tension-based perspective on alliance mindsets brings about three possible ways of dealing with tensions. First, alliance managers may negate the prevalence of tensions and consider
alliances as organizational arrangements depicting complex puzzles. Guiding by alliance management tools and frameworks (see Chapter 23), managers put the pieces together in pursuit
of success. Not understanding or neglecting to seek creative solutions may upset the status
quo, leading to premature alliance dissolution. Second, alliance managers may adopt an either/
or mindset and adopt a substitution logic (such as a trade-off).The pursuit of two opposing
objectives will be resolved by separation of activities, either physical or temporal. For example,
through task specialization and setting up separate alliance working groups, alliance partners
separate exploitation and exploration objectives. Although such an approach could be effective, the two opposing forces are still considered irreconcilable.Third, alliance managers may
opt for synthesis (i.e. a both/and mindset) when dealing with tensions and seek complementarity between opposing forces.This synthesis of two opposing forces typically generates
creative solutions because alliance managers take collective ownership of the tension and
integrate it into their joint decision-making. For example, to cope with the need for stability
and adaptation, alliance managers could resort to contracts (e.g. providing stability), yet use
Alliance mindset
367
TABLE 24.1 Two examples of tensions in alliances
Description
Tension
Solutions
Alliance to End Plastic Waste
• With 92 alliance partners,
the collaboration aims to
end plastic waste in the
environment and protect
the planet.

Internal ambition versus
external credibility
• Internal ambitions are
driving and delivering
transformational change.
• External credibility is
questioned as external
stakeholders
(e.g. Greenpeace)
claim that the alliance
is a marketing ploy
(i.e. green washing).

Partner constellation
• Partners from across the plastic
value-chain, with members
from the petrochemical,
converter, enabler and brands
segments of the value chain.
Communication
• Conveying that the result and
impact of one (failing) project
does not provide a fair picture
of what is to be a long-term
campaign investing in many
different waste projects.

Swiss Re–Oxfam alliance
• Swiss Re, a leading global
insurance company
collaborates with Oxfam
to develop and implement
a new insurance for
Ethiopian farmers against
risks to crops from climate
change.

Resistance versus interests
• Internal resistance,
as Swiss Re seeks to
expand its market to
developing countries
while being committed
to addressing climate
change.
• Internal resistance, as
Oxfam participated to
safeguard Ethiopian
farmers against risks to
their crops from climate
change by offering them
an insurance policy.

Inclusive leadership
• Inclusive leadership allowed
the project to go forward.The
project champion was respected
by other employees, and the
project had backing from
executive leadership.
Empowerment
• Champions who involved both
business and philanthropic
units, linking the project clearly
to business strategy.
Learning together
• Partners gradually developed
confdence in each other and
their approach to the issue, and
they continually explored ways
that the collaboration could
best suit the two organizations’
needs.

Sources: Endplastic (2019); GreenPeace (2021); NBS (2022); Packaginginsights (2021).

stipulations to engage in collaborative problem solving (e.g. effectuating change). In sum, an
alliance manager’s mindset (that is, the framing of tension) directly infuences alliance progress
and performance (see Table 24.1 for examples).

Alliance tensions
Prior alliance research identifed a variety of tensions. Ryan-Charleton and colleagues (2022),
for example, make a distinction between trade-offs (such as the balance between cost and
benefts) and tensions (for example, rigidity versus fexibility).The latter being different from
the former as tensions demand continuous alliance managers’ attention, whereas trade-offs
368
Alliance mindset
dissipate once a choice has been made. de Rond and Bouchikhi (2004, p. 66) provide an overview, including tensions between cooperation versus competition, design versus emergence,
innovation versus replication, and collectivism versus individualism.These tensions have been
discussed (to some extent) in this book. Coopetition alliances—partnerships between rival
frms—are replete with tensions centring on the interplay between cooperation in pursuit
of common goals and competition in pursuit of individual goals (see Chapter 16).While the
literature on alliance design has provided insights into how contracts drive alliance success,
contract adaptability is necessitated to deal with unforeseen circumstances (see Chapter 5).
Partners establish alliances to effectuate exploration and exploitation learning strategies; strategies when pursued in combination require specifc structural and processual solutions to be
effectuated (see Chapters 11, 18 and 19). Also within international alliances, tensions tend to
emerge as partners with different cultural backgrounds work together (see Chapter 13).The
common denominator across these topics is that alliance arrangements are inherently associated with tensions, and, with the ‘right’ mindset, alliance managers are able to identify and
effectively deal with tensions.
Recognizing the salience of tensions, several alliances studies have advanced insights into
how to manage alliance tensions. Das and Teng (2000a) present a tension-based framework
comprising cooperation versus competition, rigidity versus fexibility and short-term versus
long-term orientation, and alliance managers need to fnd a balance between forces, accounting for (changes in) alliance conditions. de Rond and Bouchikhi (2004) report on a longitudinal case study, showing how alliance managers (socially) construct and resolve tensions
regarding cooperation and competition, trust and vigilance, expansion and contraction, and
control and autonomy. Niesten and Stefan (2019) present the results of a literature review on
value creation (cooperation) and value capture (competition) in inter-organizational relationships and indicate that tensions associated with value creation and capture spur virtuous cycles
(such as balancing trust and contracts) and vicious cycles (for example, myopia of learning).
Jarzabkowski and colleagues (2021) show how partners in an inter-organizational systems
balance between equilibrium and disequilibrium while identifying and resolving tensions
(that is, paradoxes) to secure the availability of capital to respond to natural disasters. These
studies consistently suggest that tension identifcation and management is critical, otherwise
conficts are bound to occur. Next, we detail on four alliance tensions that are an integral part
of a ‘tension-based’ alliance mindset: (1) cooperative versus competitive tension, (2) economic
versus social tension, (3) deliberate versus emergent tension and (4) corporate versus societal
tension (see Table 24.2).

Cooperative versus competitive tension
Cooperation and competition are opposing forces (Das and Teng 2000a). Throughout the
alliance development process, any collaboration between partners balances against the competitive aspects of their partnership (Niesten and Stefan 2019).That is, each partner seeks to
reconcile joint alliance activities with its own interests. Cooperation consists of the parties’
efforts to implement value-creating conditions and processes (Das and Teng 2003). For example, as the alliance progresses, partners may contribute complementary resources (Das and
Teng 2000b), make alliance-specifc investments (Madhok and Tallman 1998), initiate reciprocal learning (Lubatkin et al. 2001) or invest in relational capital (Ariño and de la Torre 1998)
to support the collaborative logic. In contrast, competition implies efforts to appropriate value
Alliance mindset
369
TABLE 24.2 Four key tensions in alliances
Tension
Description
Trigger (examples)
Reconciliation (examples)
Cooperative vs
competitive
Collectively
creating value
versus individually
appropriating value.

Power imbalance,
internal change,
inequity, partner
asymmetry.

Hybrid compensation
mechanisms,
contingency-based
contracts, contract-trust
complementarity.

Structure vs
process
Effciency via formal
governance versus
viability via informal
governance.

Cultural differences,
resource asymmetry,
different risk
perceptions.

Comprehensive
performance
assessment, contracttrust complementarity,
balanced governance
designs.

Deliberate vs
emergent
Execution based
on planning
versus openness to
adaptation.

Managers’ preferences,
sectoral differences,
strategic misft.

Separation of activities
in units, delegation
of activities, temporal
organizing.

Corporate vs
societal
Firm-centred
(economic) logic
versus societal
responsibility of a
frm.

Clash between
partner frm cultures,
stakeholders’ voices,
code of conduct
violation.

Assume joint
ownership, transparency,
separation of activities,
narrow alliance scope,
specialized resource
contributions.

Sources: Das and Teng (2000a); Faems et al. (2008); Koza and Lewin (2000); Yin and Jamali (2021).

from the alliance, if necessary, at the expense of the partner frm (Dyer et al. 2008). As the
alliance evolves, the partners’ focus shifts to realizing a favourable pay-off structure (Parkhe
1993), opportunism (Wathne and Heide 2000), knowledge acquisition (Hamel 1991) and the
use of bargaining power (Lax and Sebenius 1986) to support their individual interests.Typically, partners become aware of the tension when they are rivals (e.g. coopetition), resources
are scarce (e.g. small versus large partners) or internal and external changes (e.g. new technologies or new market entrant) occur.Also, distrust, learning races and learning myopia may
cause competition (e.g. value appropriation) to be prioritized over cooperation (e.g. value
creation), jeopardizing the health of the collaboration. Cooperative and competitive forces
are at odds, differing in both philosophy and spirit. To realize high-performing, sustainable
alliances, such forces are indispensable and must be reconciled.
A traditional way to approach alliances involves considering value creation and appropriation as unrelated so that the alliance depicts a zero-sum situation. Attempts to appropriate
more value from the alliance have no effect on value creation. This logic can apply to pure
transaction-based alliances with fnancial objectives, but it appears less valid for more complex
alliance relationships that pursue multiple objectives (Tjemkes 2008). Alternatively, considering alliances as positive-sum situations and acknowledging their temporal interrelatedness can
help resolve the cooperative–competitive alliance tension. Initiatives to appropriate excessive value from the alliance hinder subsequent value creation, and superior value creation
reduces incentives to appropriate excessive value; therefore, value creation and appropriation
370
Alliance mindset
are interrelated. For example, exercising a bargaining power advantage to reap additional
fnancial benefts may increase a frm’s performance temporarily, but it also undermines the
counterpart’s collaborative effort and jeopardizes joint value creation. Similarly, exploiting an
absorptive capacity advantage to obtain additional knowledge may enhance a frm’s resource
endowment, but it may also ignite a learning race that undermines the alliance’s long-term
knowledge creation. In contrast, when a frm refrains from exploiting a bargaining power
and/or absorptive capacity advantage, it signals commitment to its partner, which increases
the chances of greater value creation. The frm may then appropriate more absolute value
because it focuses on cooperation rather than solely pursuing competition. In other words,
to reinforce a constructive interplay between cooperation and competition, alliance managers must establish balanced governance designs (such as contracts and trust), build and deploy
collaboration capabilities (for instance, relative absorptive capacity) and opt for hybrid compensation schemes (residual sharing, for example).

BOX 24.1 ALLIANCE MINDSET: THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES
Though more established theoretical perspectives, such as transaction cost economics,
resource-based view and institutional theory, encompass behavioural assumptions (e.g.
bounded rationality), other theoretical perspectives centring on ‘mindsets’ have been
introduced to the alliance feld. Regulatory focus theory (RFT) states that decisionmaker behaviour is induced by dispositional and situational regulatory focus. One’s
dispositional focus can be focused on avoiding negative outcomes (prevention focus)
or gaining positive outcomes (promotion focus). Situational regulatory focus is defned
by the situation in which an action takes place, which can also represent a setting
in which people are framed to work towards a gain (promotion focus) or to avoid
a loss (prevention focus). Within an alliance setting, RFT has been primarily used
to provide insight in alliance contracting (e.g. Weber and Mayer 2011). Diferent
contractual clauses can have diferent psychological impacts on the parties and how
they perceive their alliance arrangement. For example, promotion- and preventionframed contracts interpreted by managers with promotion and prevention dispositions
induce diferent emotions, behaviours and expectations; even if economic incentives
are equivalent. In turn these discrepancies may lead to diferent relationship repair
approaches and exchange outcomes (Kumar 2016). Signalling Theory is useful for
describing behaviour when two parties have access to diferent sets of information
(Connelly et al. 2011). The core logic of theory stipulates that one party, the sender,
must choose whether and how to communicate (or signal) that information, and the
other party, the receiver, must choose how to interpret the signal. Within an alliance
setting, signalling theory has been used in diferent ways, including investors’ responses
to alliance announcements, executive board’s prestige, entrepreneurs seeking endorsement of alliance relationships and international alliances as signals of organizational
legitimacy. Whereas prior alliance studies primarily focused on alliance formation,
signalling theory may also provide valuable insights in post-formation and termination
inter-partner dynamics.
Sources: Connelly et al. (2011); Kumar (2016); Weber and Mayer (2011).

Alliance mindset
371
Structure versus process alliance tension
Another alliance tension comprises the opposing pair of structure (centring on economic
effciency) and process (centring on social embeddedness) forces (Faems et al. 2008).An economic exchange view focuses on the structural design of single transactions and emphasizes
the importance of alliance design (governance form and contracts) as an effective and effcient
governance mechanism. Thus, alliance managers appear rational, purposeful and calculative.
In contrast, a social exchange view centres on relational processes in ongoing alliances and
emphasizes the importance of relational norms and capital for coordinating alliances and safeguarding partners’ interests. Social bonds and individual entanglements act as social control
mechanisms that encourage managers to reciprocate cooperative behaviours (Ring and Van
de Ven 1994). Although both structural and process forces drive alliance development and
permeate all development stages, they constitute contending forces.Typically, alliance managers experience the structure–process tension when they have different cultural backgrounds
(for example, cultural preference for structure or process), contribute different resources (for
example, fnancial versus knowledge) or interpret contractual stipulations differently (such as
risk-prone or risk-averse interpretation).Also, when alliance managers perceive a high risk of
opportunism, observe opportunities for misappropriation and anticipate coordination complexity, they may prioritize alliance structure over alliance processes, jeopardizing the health
of the collaboration.Thus, a primary focus on the structural aspects of an alliance implies an
under-socialized view of managerial action, which is problematic because social interactions
in an alliance constitute a critical prerequisite of win–win partnerships (see Chapter 7).A primary focus on alliance processes is also undesirable in that an over-socialized view neglects
the function of an alliance structure (see Chapter 5). To create a high-performance alliance,
the contrasting forces must be reconciled.
Because alliances serve to contribute to frm performance, one way to approach this tension would be simply to ignore the social (that is, process) side of alliances. Here again,
however, the logic applies better to simple transactions (market exchanges) than to complex
alliance relationships (Dwyer et al. 1987). Economic exchanges are embedded in social relationships (Granovetter 1985), and the way in which alliance managers reconcile the structure–
process tension determines alliance outcomes.Alternatively, resolutions of the alliance tension
could focus on temporal interrelatedness between alliance structure and processes. For
example, Faems and colleagues (2008) showed that contracts (that is, structure) that have a
similar degree but different nature of formalization trigger different kinds of trust dynamics
(that is, processes). Tjemkes (2008) demonstrated that, depending on the alliance’s objective, alliance design infuences performance, either directly or indirectly through relational
governance. Therefore, initial alliance design functions as an architecture that either catalyzes or impedes social interactions. However, structure and process forces may also become
manifest in unison in various distinct development stages. Poppo and Zenger (2002) found
that formal contracts and relational governance reinforce each other in effective explanations of alliance performance. According to Kumar and Nti (1998), combined assessments of
outcome and process discrepancies shape the developmental path of alliances, such that each
combination requires different managerial actions.To resolve the alliance tension, it is critical
to consider structural and processual forces simultaneously. Alliance managers must establish
balanced governance designs (such as complementarity between contracts and trust), use
comprehensive performance measurement systems (such as capturing output and process) and
opt for contingency clauses in contracts (stipulations on how to deal with unforeseen events,
372
Alliance mindset
for example). That is, alliance managers need—in addition to an in-depth understanding of
how structure and processes forces interrelate, the contingencies that affect them, and their
direct and combined impacts on alliance progress—to make use of their experience, expertise
and creativity to develop viable solutions.

Deliberate versus emergent alliance tension
In this third alliance tension, deliberate and emergent forces come into apparent confict
(Wit and Meyer 2004). Deliberateness suggests that alliances are organizational arrangements
that can be designed and managed purposively. Firms can impose controls on and generate
predictable patterns of behaviours and actions: they can formulate a set alliance strategy and
then develop a plan to execute it.This results in an alliance contract, and frms expect partners to behave consistently with the stipulations in that contract. However, unforeseen events
often prompt learning, change and adaptation, which generate necessary patterns of emergent
(strategic) actions to recover the relationship (see Chapter 25). For example, the introduction
of a new product by a competitor may prompt partners to re-evaluate their initial plans and
develop an alternative course of action. Thus, a primary focus on deliberate forces suggests
that alliance managers have an instrumental understanding of alliance management, which
conficts with the inherently unstable nature of these relationships.A primary focus on emergent forces implies a reactive approach to alliance management, which is likely to result in
under-performance due to a lack of direction. The deliberate–emergent tension typically
becomes manifest when alliance managers have different cultural backgrounds (for example,
cultural preference for planning or fexibility), operate in different sectors (for example, public
versus private) or differ in their strategic ambitions (for example, exploitation or exploration).
To resolve this tension, alliance partners could simply ignore one force. If they ignore
emergence, partners depend solely on a blueprint to form and execute their alliance, which
often creates structural and contractual rigidities and restrains partners from responding to
internal and external unforeseen circumstances (Das and Teng 2000a). Moreover, partners
may become locked into a repeated mode of interaction, with little learning, which initiates greater frustration for both partners in terms of the lack of progress. In contrast, when
emergent forces receive too much emphasis, the alliance tends to evolve without direction or
control. Even if the alliance objectives have been planned intentionally, progress in the alliance
allows new objectives to emerge (Ariño 2003).Without a clear strategy and aligned system, it
is diffcult to evaluate the potential value of each new objective.Thus, another option arises:
to focus on the temporal interrelatedness between deliberate and emergent forces.To achieve
short-term results, decision makers set milestones and execute a straightforward project plan,
while they also consider their formulated long-term objectives. As the alliance progresses,
they use their new insights to deal with emergent circumstances. However, deliberateness and
emergence may appear simultaneously, in which case the solution requires some form of separation. For example, it may be benefcial to disconnect exploration and exploitation activities
in the alliance (Koza and Lewin 2000). Exploration requires fexibility, whereas exploitation
benefts from a more rigid approach. Similarly, the alliance might distinguish decision making at strategic versus operational levels. In the former, decision-making processes should
account for emergent circumstances, whereas in the latter, deliberateness helps the partners
achieve effciency. In any case, there is a need for skilful, experienced alliance managers to
reconcile the tension between deliberate ‘stick to the plan’ and emergent ‘open to adaptation’
approaches.

Alliance mindset
373
Corporate versus social tension
In this fourth alliance tension, corporate and societal forces come into apparent confict.
A corporate logic suggests that alliances are organizational arrangements that frms use to
attain corporate goals, including economic, strategic and innovation motives.With the exception of detailing on cross-sector partnerships (Chapter 15) and societal alliances (Chapter 26),
this book conveys a corporate logic—forming, managing, and evaluating alliances, accounting
for contingencies, in support of corporate goals. However, more and more frms are conceived
of fulflling a societal role, extending beyond shareholders’ interests. Specifcally, challenges
pertaining to common public goods (that is, grand challenges), such as environmental pollution, healthcare and labour conditions, extend beyond the social responsibility of a single
frm (Yin and Jamali 2021). Increasingly, frms forge societal alliances in support of this societal responsibility (Sadovnikova and Pujari 2017). This focus suggests that alliance managers
devote time and energy to form and manage alliances in support of a frm’s corporate societal responsibility, which may confict with the inherently economic nature of alliance relationships. Alliance managers experience this tension, for example, when institutional logics
embedded in the partner organizations clash (for example, public versus private), internal and
external stakeholders voice concerns (for example, social movements) or codes of conduct are
violated (for example, transparency).
Acknowledging that frms have a dual responsibility—both corporate and societal—alliance managers must understand that this tension is a fundamental part of any alliance arrangement.To resolve this tension, alliance partners could simply ignore one force and, for example,
favour a corporate logic over a societal logic. A primary focus on corporate goals implies a
frm-centred (economic) approach to alliance management, which is likely to undermine
a frm’s (corporate) social responsibility practices.A primary focus on alliances in support of a
frm’s societal role is also counter-productive in that a frm with a proft goal would be typically criticized for green-washing. Nonetheless, favouring a corporate logic could work for
certain alliances, such as (simple) learning and supplier alliances, but in more visible alliances,
such as co-branding partnerships, stakeholders may voice concerns. One way to deal with the
tension could be to separate the corporate and societal activities. By narrowing the scope of
their collective activities, for example, partners only contribute specialized resources. It would
also allow them to understand how both the corporate and societal logics could advance a
frm’s competitive advantage. For example, together with public partners, a frm could use
its resources to develop and market a new sustainable technology. In addition, transparency
and clear communication about motives, contributions and goals tends to mitigate concerns.
Yin and Jamali (2021) showed that within successful societal partnerships, all partners assume
ownership of the societal issue, integrate it into their main activities and frame challenges
as an opportunity to collectively develop creative solutions. In other words, reconciling the
corporate–societal tension requires alliance managers with a fexible alliance mindset.

Summary
Although strategic alliances can improve a frm’s competitive advantage, they are also inherently fragile, unstable, and diffcult to manage.Whereas deep knowledge of strategic alliance
management advances informed and systematic decision making, alliance managers’ mindsets
are critical for building successful partnerships. Alliance managers must however recognize
that tensions are embedded in any collaborative arrangement, within and between alliance
374 Alliance mindset
development stages. Thus, strategic alliance management consists of consecutive and repetitive decisions propelled by interactive forces; namely, cooperative versus competitive, structure
versus process, deliberate versus emergent, and corporate versus societal. An in-depth understanding of these contending forces, obtained from extensive experience, will help alliance
managers better predict, prevent and even deal with specifc tensions in their own alliance
situations. By combining knowledge with managerial experience, expertise and creativity,
alliance managers can formulate and implement the right decisions for each unique alliance
situation they confront. In short, to navigate alliance tensions, an alliance mindset encompassing an either/and logic will promote joint ownership of the tension, invoke creative solutions
and enable alliance managers to steer the partnership towards success.

CASE: MICROSOFT1
Microsoft’s mission is to enable people and businesses throughout the world to realize their
full potential by creating technology that transforms the way people work, play and communicate. The company develops and markets software, services and hardware devices that
deliver new opportunities, greater convenience and enhanced value to people’s lives. Microsoft’s products include operating systems for computing devices, servers, phones and other
intelligent devices; server applications for distributed computing environments; productivity applications; business solution applications; desktop and server management tools; software development tools; video games; and online advertising. The company also designs
and sells hardware devices, including Surface RT and Surface Pro, the Xbox 360 gaming
and entertainment console, Kinect for Xbox 360, Xbox 360 accessories and Microsoft PC
accessories. Furthermore, Microsoft offers cloud-based solutions that provide customers
with software, services and content over the internet by way of shared computing resources
located in centralized data centres. Examples of cloud-based computing services include
Microsoft Offce 365, Microsoft Dynamics CRM Online, Windows Azure, Bing, Skype, Xbox
LIVE and Yammer. Across its business, Microsoft earns revenue from usage fees, advertising
and subscriptions. The company also provides consulting and product and solution support
services, and training and certifcation. In support of this business model, Microsoft establishes alliance arrangements with a variety of partners, though with a singular expectation.
Microsoft expects that alliance partners embrace and continually improve and uphold
Microsoft’s ethical and integrity standards and operate in full compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations while conducting business with Microsoft and its customers. Microsoft
strives to be more than just a good company—they want to be a great company. Microsoft
is committed to their mission of empowering every person and every organization on the
planet to achieve more. This mission refects who they are as a company, how they manage their business internally and how Microsoft works externally with customers, partners,
governments and suppliers. Microsoft’s partners are responsible for training all employees
who work on behalf of Microsoft and need to ensure that all staff members involved in a
partnership adhere to the ‘Partner Code of Conduct’, a document stipulating how alliance
staff members should behave.
The code of conduct details on values, for example. Microsoft’s values are the foundation
of their success and refect the company’s continued commitment to ethical and responsible business practices. The core values are respect, integrity and accountability. While
Alliance mindset
375
conducting business with Microsoft customers, alliance partners will conduct their business
practices and activities in accordance with applicable law, with integrity, fairness, respect
and in an ethical manner. For instance, partners will not commit fraud or violate anti-trust
laws, and they will promote fair competition and comply with tender regulatory requirements. Furthermore, alliance staff will conduct themselves in a professional manner at all
times, helping Microsoft to create an inclusive, productive, respectful and professional environment, free from any forms of discrimination or harassment. Also, partners will respect
intellectual property rights, protect confdential information and comply with privacy rules
and regulations. If issues arise, partners are encouraged to work with their primary Microsoft contact in resolving a business practice or compliance concerns. At times when this is
not possible, partners should report any concerns about violation of the code of conduct or
applicable laws to their legal department and/or their ethics and compliance offcer.
In 2022, Microsoft and Meta (i.e. owner of Facebook and WhatsApp) teamed up to deliver
immersive experiences for the future of work and play. Meta’s mission is giving people the
power to build communities. Meta is building innovative new ways to help people feel
closer to each other, and the makeup of the company refects the diverse perspectives of the
people who use our technologies. Meta’s main principles are as follows: build connection
and community, serve everyone, keep people safe, protect privacy and promote economy
opportunity. The Microsoft–Meta alliance seeks to provide customers with more choice and
security as they venture into the metaverse. For example, Mesh for Microsoft Teams and
Microsoft 365 apps will be made available on Meta Quest devices This enables, for instance,
users to join a Teams meeting from inside Meta Horizon Workrooms. The partners will also
explore together ways to bring Xbox Cloud Gaming to Meta Quest Store. This partnership
enables Microsoft to continue evolving their mixed-reality devices roadmap, whereas Meta
obtains access to new services. Together, the partners establish the foundations of a responsible metaverse with security, compliance and enterprise-grade experiences. Together, they
will continue to unlock new possibilities for the future of work.

Questions
1
2
3
Tensions typically originate in values, such as those that are articulated in Microsoft’s
‘Partner Code of Conduct’. Explain what tensions are inherently associated with the
code of conduct.
How does the ‘Partner Code of Conduct’ imprint Microsoft’s alliance managers’
mindset?
What tensions exists in the Microsoft–Meta alliance, and how can alliance managers
cope with these tensions?

Note
1 Microsoft (2022a, 2022b, 2022c, 2022d); Meta (2022a, 2022b).

25
ALLIANCE SYSTEM
As organizational entities, alliances are inherently complex to manage, and they are continually under threat from external contingencies that originate either in the partners’ own
organization or in the external environment. The preceding chapters have discussed how
these internal and external forces drive alliance development and the instruments alliance
managers can use to develop win–win alliances. However, establishing and maintaining alliances also cause changes in partners’ organizations and environments, which in turn could
force managers to modify their alliance design and management in an effort to maintain ft
between the alliance, the alliance partners and the environment. A misft could lead to deteriorating effciency or effectiveness and, in an extreme situation, could decrease the viability
of the alliance or even decrease the viability of one or all alliance partners in the environment.
Together, these relationships between the alliance, the alliance partner organizations and the
environment constitute an alliance system.The dynamic interaction within an alliance system
has been referred to as alliance co-evolution.This chapter starts by explaining what is meant
by a co-evolutionary view on alliances, as well as why, when and how alliance co-evolution
occurs. The third section uses the alliance development framework to present managerial
guidelines, and the chapter concludes with a summary and a case illustration.

A co-evolutionary view
The idea of co-evolution is rooted in the tradition of population ecology and evolutionary theory (Hannan and Freeman 1977) and refers to the simultaneous development of
organizations and their environment, both independently and interactively (Wilson and
Hynes 2009). Co-evolution assumes that change may occur in all interacting populations
of organizations, which allows changes to be driven by direct interaction and by feedback.
The theory of alliance co-evolution suggests that natural selection (that is, the argument
that an alliance that fts with its environment has a greater chance of survival) does take
place but that the simultaneous change in organizations connected through an alliance
results in favourable inherited traits that bestow certain advantages, both at an individual
level and at a dyadic level. Alliance co-evolution occurs in a population consisting of
heterogeneous frms that have adaptive learning capability and are able to interact and
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-25
Alliance system
377
TABLE 25.1 Driving and inhibiting forces of alliance adaptation
Driving forces
Inhibiting forces
Alliance environment
Governments changing foreign
direct investment policies,
competitors introducing new
technologies and companies
entering or exiting industries may
prompt adaptation.

Governments raising legal and
other barriers to exit or entry
markets, competitors forming
multi-partner alliances and a lack
of legitimacy in an environment
may create inertia.

Partner frms
Internal reorganizations, a shift
in corporate strategy, a shift in
resource needs, a shift in fnancial
position and changes to the
board of directors may prompt
adaptation.

Existing alliances with other
frms, lack of necessary resources,
internal political games and
administrative policies and
procedures may create inertia.

Alliance
Worse-than-expected
performance, partners updating
their expectations, the governance
form appearing to be ineffcient
and differential learning may
prompt adaptation.

Sunk costs due to nonrecoverable investments in
technology, machinery and
personnel; the dynamics of
political coalitions; and a lack of
partner interactions may create
inertia.

mutually infuence each other, and where at least two frms have formed an alliance (Volberda and Lewin 2003). In addition, some initiating event, which can either be internal
(within the alliance) or external (within one or both alliance partner organizations and or
the environment), is present to trigger the co-evolutionary process (see Table 25.1). This
dynamic interaction between alliance, partner organizations and environment implies that
organizations and the alliance itself represent adaptive entities that, based on learning and
experience, engage in a continuous and interrelated self-renewal processes in an attempt
to seek and maintain ft.
In order to understand why alliance co-evolution occurs, it is important to elaborate on
three overarching principles that underpin co-evolution (Volberda and Lewin 2003). First,
self-renewing organizations focus on managing variety by regulating internal rates of change
so that they equal or exceed relevant external rates of change. For example, frms reorganize
their organizations in response to unforeseen moves by competitors, changes in technology
and customers’ demands. Second, self-renewing organizations seek to optimize self-organization, which suggests that they are continuously engaged in learning and adaptive processes
to improve their ability to maintain a ft between themselves and their environment. Third,
self-renewing organizations synchronize concurrent exploitation and exploration. In this
context, exploitation refers to the strategic intention to enhance performance by leveraging
existing capabilities, while exploration refers to the strategic intent to enhance performance
by discovering new potential useful capabilities. Alliances represent a way of evoking organizational self-renewal; they enable frms to align fexibly with environmental requirements;
they trigger internal optimization, and frms contemplating an alliance may use it to exploit
and explore while avoiding competence traps (too much exploitation) and learning traps (too
much exploration) (March 1991).

378
Alliance system
Though four co-evolutionary generative mechanisms have been distinguished (see
Table 25.2) to illustrate the wide range of evolutionary paths that can occur, within the context of alliances, managed selection provides the foundation for the underlying principles of
coevolving in an alliance system (Volberda and Lewin 2003). Managed selection suggests that
self-renewing organizations can use alliances to manage internal rates of change, optimize
self-organization and balance concurrent exploration and exploitation. Moreover, managed
selection implies that alliance governance is a mixture of market selection mechanisms and
managerial adaptation processes, which makes this view less path-dependent and deterministic than, say, the naïve selection mechanism. More specifcally, when selection is applied to
alliance management, it suggests that devising partnerships is one way that frms adapt to a
changing environment.
Whereas evolution suggests that change initially occurs at the frm level, co-evolution
considers simultaneous changes with frms and their environment, or dyadic pairs of frms. In
addition, a co-evolutionary view captures multi-directional causalities over a long period of
time, in which the outcomes of co-evolution are emergent and in which changes in any one
variable (for example, at the micro or macro level) may be caused endogenously by changes in
the other (Das and Teng 2002). Consequently, a co-evolutionary view is made up of dynamic
trajectories evoked by drivers that enable and restrict change within an alliance system. For
TABLE 25.2 Four co-evolutionary trajectories
Description
Naïve selection
Co-evolution through naïve selection proceeds through a continuous cycle
of variation, selection and retention and causes a frm (or organization) to
evolve towards a better ft with the environment.Variations emerge through
blind or random change initiatives, while selection occurs principally through
competition for scarce resources, and retention involves forces that perpetuate
and maintain selected initiatives.

Managed selection
Co-evolution through managed selection suggests that managers develop
preferences for certain responses or variations. Instead of blind variations,
variations become more deliberate or intelligent, based on past experience.
Management may develop forms of anticipatory control system in which
prior knowledge functions as a selector, blocking perceived dangerous or
inadequate actions before they are executed.

Hierarchical renewal
Co-evolution through hierarchical renewal suggests that managers can
shape their environment and that strategy making involves multiple levels
of management. In this context, co-evolution is driven primarily by the
strategic intent of senior management.Adaptation results from the top-down
administrative decisions, and the resulting outcomes are highly idiosyncratic.
Successful trajectories are highly dependent on senior management’s decision
rationality and industry foresight.

Holistic renewal
Co-evolution through holistic renewal focuses on collective sense making
and suggests a close link between collective cognitions processes of
co-evolution. Periods of stability and convergence, as opposed to those of
upheaval and change, are mirrored in similar changes in beliefs and ideologies.
Interpretations give meaning to data and precede learning and action.

Source: Volberda and Lewin (2003).

Alliance system
379
example, economic, social, technological, environmental and political macro-variables may
change over time and infuence frms’ micro-level alliance decisions. This, in turn, infuences the broader alliance environment, including alliance partners’ organizations (Wilson and
Hynes 2009). Because frms are able to change themselves proactively, their alliances and, to
a certain degree, their environment (that is, they can select the ‘best’ alternative), alliance coevolution occurs through a deliberate approach rather than via random chance-like processes.

Drivers of alliance co-evolution
The literature on alliance co-evolution has emerged only recently, which means that conclusive evidence on alliance co-evolution is virtually non-existent (Volberda and Lewin 2003).
However, the alliance studies that examined alliance co-evolution did identify drivers of alliance co-evolution operating at three levels of analysis: the alliance, the partner organizations
and the alliance environment.

Alliance level
At the alliance level, outcome and process discrepancies may prompt adaptation in alliance
conditions and processes (Kumar and Nti 1998), including changes in the governance, the
alliance contract, the division of activities, decision making and performance expectations. In
turn, these modifcations affect the development and outcomes of the alliance, which creates a
continuous cycle of learning and adaptation (Büchel 2002).Although multiple drivers of adaptation have been identifed (see Table 25.1), these tend to operate through three key mechanisms (Koza and Lewin 1998): (1) relative absorptive capacity, (2) control and (3) identity.
A partner’s relative absorptive capacity is a critical driver of alliance adaptation and development (Koza and Lewin 1998). Relative absorptive capacity refers to the extent to which
partners have a similar ability to value, assimilate and commercialize knowledge within their
own organization (Lane and Lubatkin 1998).The extent to which alliance partners are similar
(or different) in their ability to learn from and with one another may cause partners’‘resource
endowments’ to diverge or converge over time, which creates different managerial responses
(Nakamura et al. 1996). Resource convergence eliminates the initial motives to establish the
alliance, which requires managers to dissolve the alliance or seek alternative ways to create
value. In contrast, resource divergence increases partners’ dependence on one another, which
encourages them to increase efforts to acquire each other’s valuable resources. In addition,
learning about each other’s capabilities may cause partners’ strategic intentions to diverge or
converge (see Box 25.1). For example, examining co-evolution in the banking industry, UlHaq (p. 154 2005) identifes three development patterns: (1) ‘differential parallel co-evolution’,
in which the evolution of the strategic intents of the two frms are at different rates but in
a broadly similar direction; (2) ‘differential convergent co-evolution’, in which the strategic
intents of the two frms evolve at different rates but in a convergent direction; and (3) ‘differential divergent co-evolution’, where the strategic intents of the two frms evolve at different rates
but in a divergent direction. Although partners’ absorptive capacity functions as a driver for
alliance adaptation, the impact is, to a certain degree, conditioned by the exploitation or exploration intent of the alliance. In exploration alliances, partners’ ability to acquire knowledge is
critical, whereas the role of absorptive capacity is of minor concern in exploitation alliances.
Therefore, asymmetry between partners in terms of absorptive capacity is likely to trigger
adaptation in exploration alliances to control the emergence of learning races (Hamel 1991).

380
Alliance system
BOX 25.1 NEXIA’S CO-EVOLUTION
Nexia is a professional service network in the public accounting industry and was
intentionally forged and formally organized in order to produce cross-border referrals. It selected members by means of two criteria: potential members are independent
national players, and they lack the ability or desire to internationalize. However, as time
passed, some members discovered and became attracted to opportunities beyond their
national market. In addition, unfair distribution of outcomes led individual members to
bypass the original intention of the network by entering each other’s markets independently. To cope with this unintended consequence, Nexia developed two initiatives.
First, it imposed a variety of coordinating, integrating and formalizing mechanisms
to support its referral work, and it invested in building a collective network identity.
The expectation was that enhancing a network identity would attenuate the member
frms’ incentives to defect. However, as tensions rose, Nexia realized that nurturing and
institutionalizing one’s identity was not enough to deal with competitive behaviours.
Second, Nexia’s control mechanisms were not highly elaborated initially because of the
perceived need to minimize overhead costs. The controls were primarily developed to
facilitate cooperation in international referrals. However, as the potentially opportunistic intent of some member frms began to emerge, Nexia developed more stringent
mechanisms and procedures to counteract and control the behaviour of participants.
Source: Koza and Lewin (1999).

Control mechanisms enable alliance partners to monitor alliance progress and emerging
outcome and process discrepancies (Kumar 2010).These mechanisms function as an important driver of alliance adaptation and development (Koza and Lewin 1998). For example,
Ariño and de la Torre’s (1998) detailed account of the development of an international joint
venture suggests that assessments of effciency and equity conditions prompt partner frms to
address dissatisfying situations in various manners, such as by improving relational governance,
engaging in contractual renegotiations, doing nothing and terminating the alliance. However,
alliances vary in their use of control mechanisms and, for example, match the choice of output and behaviour control with the exploration and exploitation intents (Koza and Lewin
1998). In exploitation alliances, output controls are predominantly used to capture short-term
results, whereas exploration alliances employ behavioural and process control to tap into timedependent activities such as learning.When the intended outcome is uncertain or vague, as
is the case in exploration-oriented alliances, an alliance is more receptive to adaptation as
managers change their initial conditions once the outcomes become clearer.
Identity also functions as a mechanism that enables alliance learning and adaptation (Koza
and Lewin 1998). Identity may prompt processes of collective sense making, which creates a
sense of shared fate among alliance members. For example, creating a common identity in a
joint venture eases decision making, confict resolution and learning as individuals share similar values and norms. In contrast, identifying with one’s partners could be counter-productive
due to identity conficts.Therefore, identifcation with the alliance functions as an integrating
mechanism within the alliance and as a differentiating mechanism that demarcates the alliance
Alliance system
381
itself from the partners. Identity integration is more critical in exploitation alliances because it
enables partners to exploit existing capabilities jointly. In exploration alliances, identifcation
tends to be with the partners as identifying with an alliance partner may inhibit knowledge
acquisition and result in alliances that extend beyond the intended time horizon. However, a
certain degree of identifcation can serve to moderate confict.

Partner frm level
Changes in partner organizations, both foreseen and unforeseen, may prompt alliance adaptations (Koza and Lewin 1998).A shift in corporate strategy, internal reorganizations, changing
resource requirements, a shift in fnancial position, changes in required technology and even
a change in the board of directors may encourage managers to modify alliance design and
management (Blodgett 1992; Shortell and Zajac 1988). For example, the alliance between
Liz Claiborne and Avon encountered diffculty when Avon acquired an upscale cosmetics
company in an effort to enhance its image (Stafford 1994). Because the acquisition increased
the market commonality of the two partners, Liz Claiborne began to view Avon more as a
competitor than a partner, which led to the termination of the alliance.To deal with conficting pressures for exploration and exploitation, a frm’s alliance portfolio is likely to evolve
continuously (Lavie and Rosenkopf 2006), with existing alliances terminated and new ones
established. In addition, the pursuit of exploration and exploitation may cause alliance partners to impose changes to their alliances, such as modifcations in governance form, incentive systems and monitoring systems, in an attempt to maintain consistency between their
corporate/business strategies and the alliance objectives.A shift in a partner frm’s experience
managing alliances as an alliance progresses may also trigger alliance adaptations (Das and
Teng 2002). A frm that increases its institutionalized alliance experience may enhance its
reputation and function as a signal for trustworthiness, which reduces the need for (costly)
contractual governance.
As an alliance develops, it may also cause changes within the partner frms’ organizations.
Alliance outcomes and processes are likely to affect alliance partners as, in most cases, the
alliance is at least partially integrated into the organization. Reciprocal fnancial and organizational relationships facilitate the transfer of resources, information and routines, which are
not necessarily part of the alliance agreement, from the alliance to the partner organizations.
An exploration alliance designed to develop new products is often organized through an
equity-based arrangement that is characterized by high levels of involvement and integration. Consequently, an alliance partner is likely to absorb valuable knowledge elements of the
initial alliance agreement and may also acquire additional knowledge and information about
areas such as markets, production technologies and operating procedures.The assimilation of
this knowledge changes a frm’s resource endowment, which means it is also likely to cause
changes in a frm’s strategy, systems and operations.Although exploitation alliances tend to be
organized through non-equity-based arrangements (that is, with relatively little integration),
a similar transfer of resources, information and routines may occur. For example, successful
supplier alliances are characterized by alliance-specifc investments, such as co-production
locations, which often require partner organizations to adjust their operations to accommodate one another’s needs. For example, Wilson and Hynes (2009) show that a frm seeking
access to the fresh produce market in the UK through an international alliance experienced
changes in its technical skills, new product development and networking opportunities as a
result of the alliance.

382
Alliance system
Alliance environment level
The alliance environment affects a frm’s decisions to form and manage alliances (Koza
and Lewin 1998). In a stable environment, a frm may enhance its competitive position by
establishing exploitation alliances to use existing capabilities with the aim of achieving cost
reductions and economies of scale, for example. Exploration alliances are more suitable in a
dynamic environment as a heterogeneous resource endowment contributes to a frm’s ability to respond in an appropriate and timely manner to new circumstances. For example, the
results of Lampel and Shamsie’s (2003) study of the US motion picture industry indicate that
changes in the environment caused a transition to fexible hub organizations supported by
alliances. Practices and routines that speed up mobilizing capabilities became more important
to box offce success than practices and routines that make up the transforming capabilities
associated with a studio era dominated by integrated hierarchies. Jacobides and Winter (2005)
report on co-evolution trajectories in American mortgage banking and Swiss watch manufacturing.Their results indicate that, within an industry, differential proftability, arising from heterogeneous capabilities across frms, promotes distinct vertical structures.Whereas incremental
innovation provides access to specialization gains and produces a secular drift towards vertical
disintegration, radical changes in technology require new and integrated capabilities, leading
to a phase of vertical reintegration.Therefore, frms are sensitive to changing environmental
conditions, such as shifts in customer preferences and technological developments, and this
prompts them to adapt their alliance strategies.
Changes in the alliance environment may also require partners to adapt alliance design
and management and to renew the conditions under which the collaboration takes place.
For example, if competitors intend to introduce a new technology that renders existing technologies obsolete, partners engaged in a learning alliance may need to speed up their own
development process, search for possibilities to collaborate with these competitors or decide
to dissolve the alliance.Tjemkes and Furrer (2011) argue that industry conditions also affect
managerial responses to adversity within alliances. Firms that operate in industries with high
technological turbulence tend to prefer destructive response strategies, unlike those frms
that operate in industries characterized by low technological turbulence, whose response
strategies aim to maintain and preserve their alliance relationships. In contrast, when frms
operate in industries characterized by low competitive intensity, the relative importance of
preserving existing alliances diminishes as alternative suppliers could be required to respond
satisfactorily to customers’ preferences. Consequently, these frms are more willing to put the
alliance relationship at risk and more likely to prefer destructive response strategies, such as
exit, opportunism and neglect.
In turn, an alliance may impact its environment as alliance formation and outcomes could
impact industry and market dynamics. For example, the announcement of the Star Alliance, a
multi-partner airline alliance involving United Airlines, Lufthansa, Scandinavian Airlines, Air
Canada and Thai Airways, led non-members to immediately look for partners, such as Air
France with Air India and American Airlines with Aerolineas Argentinas (Guidice et al. 2003).
Firms respond to alliance competition by seeking and forming countervailing alliances with
similar partners as a way of duplicating the benefts their rivals are gaining (Gimeno 2004).
A frm could seek entry into its rivals’ networks by creating alliances with its rivals’ partner,
or it could seek to match the rivals’ advantage by creating countervailing alliances with other
partners that also face the same competitive threat. For example, Wilson and Hynes (2009)
report that the formation of alliances within the fresh produce industry in the UK changed
Alliance system
383
the power dynamics across the value chain, which prompted other parties in the value chain
to form new alliances.

Alliance system
The linkages between alliance, alliance partner organizations and alliance environment create
an alliance system in which alliance co-evolutionary processes occur (see Figure 25.1). Each
level represents a unit of change but also depicts the object of change (Wilson and Hynes
2009).Therefore, drivers associated with each level generate learning and adaptation directly,
interactively and reciprocally within the alliance system.This dynamic pattern of interactions,
both within and between different levels of the system, generates co-evolutionary alliance
processes in which all elements progress. However, a state of equilibrium is never likely to
be achieved owing to converging and diverging patterns of positive and negative feedback
and the extent to which learning occurs. van der Meer-Kooistra and Kamminga (2015), for
Time
Environment
Environment
dynamics
dynamics
Alliance
Alliance
learning and adaptation
learning and adaptation
Partner A
Partner A
Partner B
Partner B
organizational self-renewal
organizational self-renewal
= intra-level effect
FIGURE 25.1
Alliance system
= cross-level effect
384
Alliance system
example, show how antecedents within the parent company, within the JV relationship, in
the environment of the JV relationship and in the environment of the parent company, led to
decisions made within the parent company, and how these decisions in turn affected the JV
relationship and responses by the parent companies.
Taking the perspective of one frm participating in an alliance system, this chapter also proposes that proactive management of an alliance system is beyond the ability of any manager.
Owing to bounded rationality and cognitive limitations, it is unlikely that a single alliance
manager could comprehend the relationships between drivers of change, intermediary mechanisms or the consequences of change across the alliance, partner frm and environmental
levels of analysis. Nevertheless, we suggest that when frms are viewed as self-renewal entities,
they have a certain degree of managerial control over co-evolutionary processes:
•
•
•
Based on continuous assessment of effciency and equity conditions, alliance partners
may initiate modifcations to alliance design and alliance management, thereby generating continuous cycles of learning and adaptation.
Based on continuous assessment of alliance (portfolio) outcomes, alliance partners may
experience and initiate modifcations to their frm’s strategy and organization.
Based on continuous assessment of alliance environment, alliance partners may experience and initiate modifcations to their frm’s strategy and organization, as well as to alliance design and management.

A frm can enhance the viability of an alliance system by installing buffering mechanisms and
boundary-spanning agents. Buffering refers to the regulation and/or insulation of alliance
activities, functions, resources and individuals from the effects of changes in environment and/
or partner organization (Lynn 2005). Different buffering mechanisms can be integrated into
the core activities of the alliance.A buffer of fnancial resources within an alliance functions as
a cushion when unforeseen circumstances threaten the alliance’s viability.Appointing a manager who is responsible for fnding, hiring and training new alliance employees can reduce
the potential uncertainty of not having the right experts with the right collaborative mindset.
Another example of buffering is allocating surplus resources to stimulate radical innovation in response to anticipated external changes, while simultaneously allocating resources
to achieve the immediate alliance objectives. Boundary-spanning agents link and coordinate
alliance activities with key elements of the environment and partner organizations (Jemison
1984).These agents are concerned primarily with the exchange of information to detect and
bring into the alliance information about changes in the environment and alliance partner
organizations, as well as send information into the environment that presents the alliance in a
favourable light. For example, in order to detect and bring relevant information about alliance
partner organizations, an agent could hold regular meetings with people from relevant parts
of the corporate and business levels of each alliance partner organization.

Navigating an alliance system
Drawing on a co-evolutionary view, alliances are complex adaptive systems that have far from
optimal performance. Changes at the alliance, partner frm and alliance environment level
require managers to learn and adapt their alliances continuously if they aim to navigate the
alliance system successfully.

Alliance system
385
In addition to factors such as economic, strategic and learning motivations, a co-evolutionary view stresses the importance of environmental conditions as frms consider to establish an
alliance. For example, a frm may prefer an alliance when resources are not readily available in
a market and its environment is volatile as it provides a frm with the required strategic fexibility.An alliance then functions as a strategic way for a frm to cope with external uncertainties. However, when developing an alliance strategy, it is important to consider implications
that extend beyond the alliance’s direct value creation potential. Forging an alliance may affect
environmental dynamics, which may have positive or negative consequences for the frm. For
example, allying with a competitor to achieve economies of scale may prompt other rivals to
form partnerships. An alliance may also trigger changes in the frm’s organization as knowledge, resources and organizational routines are transformed through the alliance relationship.
When co-evolutionary processes in an alliance system are taken as a reference point, alliance formation activities (i.e. selection, negotiation, and design) constitute a crucial activity.
Though it is critical to select a partner with similar resource and organizational attributes, as
partner misft is a primary source of alliance adaptation. For example, a differential ability to
learn combined with diverging organizational identities, specifcally in exploration alliances,
may trigger a learning race and an escalating cycle of modifcations that could potentially
lead to the termination of the alliance. In addition, different perceptions about internal and
external developments must be reconciled before alliance negotiators are likely to agree on
the nature, the timing and the cause of an alliance adaptation. For example, a partner’s vulnerability to changes in the environment, which may include fnancial strength, portfolio
of alliances and innovative capacity, is likely to disrupt the alliance (system). Co-evolutionary
alliance processes involve repetitive cycles of learning and adaptation. This means that
an alliance design shapes how learning and adaptation in response to unforeseen circumstances occurs as the alliance progresses. More specifcally, partners designing an alliance must
consider, to the best of their ability, the impact and consequences of co-evolutionary processes
within the alliance system. For example, a learning alliance could be organized through a
non-equity-based arrangement (as opposed to an equity-based one) and supplemented with
process and behavioural control mechanisms as partners operate in a relative dynamic environment, which increases the need for fexibility. In other words, governance form, alliance
contracts and control mechanisms need to be tailored to the (expected) alliance environment,
the partner frms’ conditions and the alliance objectives.
The signifcance of relational adaptability increases as the alliance progresses towards the
alliance launch, management and assessment stages. Adaptability refers to the willingness and
ability of partners to be fexible when conducting the relationship, above and beyond the constraints posed by alliance design (if necessary).This causes partners to treat the relationship as
an adjustable framework in which changes will occur to redress imbalances in the relationship
if either party is adversely affected by changing circumstances. Moreover, partners are willing
to make these adaptations without resorting to expensive and time-consuming contractual
renegotiations. For example, a new alliance may induce changes in the partners’ organization, which adversely affect the effectiveness of existing alliance arrangements. Adaptability
enables the partners to formulate and implement solutions (e.g. exclusivity).Alliance managers must also pay attention to changes in their partner’s organization, as well as the environment, and their potential impact on alliance design and management.While the performance
metric system should be tailored to the objectives of the alliance, additional metrics could
include indicators that tap into a partner frm’s organization (such as shifts in strategy; shifts
386
Alliance system
in organizational structure, culture and routines; new product and service) and indicators that
tap into the alliance environment (such as technological advancements, industry dynamics,
political and economic developments). Information about changes in the alliance system is
critical to prepare adaptations in alliance design and management.
From an alliance system perspective, exiting an alliance is as critical as forging one.Although
a frm may shift its focus away from the single transaction, termination could cause a series of
changes within an alliance system.The frm and its partner must act and secure the provision
of resources via alternative arrangements, which may include a new alliance, an acquisition
or a market exchange. In addition, competitors, suppliers and customers may respond as the
termination may either present new opportunities or restrict their range of strategic actions.
Paradoxically, terminating one under-performing alliance to improve a frm’s performance
may actually harm the frm due to unpredictable alliance system processes.

Summary
Alliance co-evolution occurs when different parts of an alliance system evolve simultaneously
and interact with each other in such a way that learning and adaptations in the alliance, the
partners’ organization and the alliance environment infuence interactively the performance
of the alliance, and thus the performance of the partner frms. As such, alliances depict the
outcome, object and trigger of change in the alliance system. However, it is most likely that
a state of equilibrium will never be achieved, owing to the converging and diverging patterns of positive and negative feedback across the alliance system levels. Owing to ongoing
co-evolutionary processes, the purposeful management of an alliance system is beyond the
ability of any manager. However, taking the viewpoint of a single alliance, managers should
attempt to take account of the triggers and consequences of co-evolutionary processes in alliance decision making.

CASE: ORAL CARE APPLIANCES1
The world market for oral care appliances is forecast to grow to $99.78 billion in 2030. This
growth is due to improving economic conditions, an ageing Western population, increasing
awareness with regard to personal wellness, growing online sales and a further increasing
level of automation. There is intense competition in the personal care electrical appliances
market due to the presence of a limited number of players, including Colgate-Palmolive,
Helen of Troy, Johnson & Johnson, Matsushita Electric Industrial Company, Royal Philips
Electronics, Procter and Gamble, Braun, Sanyo Electric Company and Wahl Clipper Corporation. A sub-segment in the personal care market is oral care appliances.
Proctor & Gamble (P&G) is an important player in the oral care market. In 2000, P&G
was facing declining innovation payoffs. With the company gradually losing its grip on the
market and losing more than half its market capitalization along the way, the new CEO Lafley called for a reinvention of the company’s innovation model. Instead of nurturing innovation from inside the company, Langley set a target to acquire 50 per cent of P&G innovations
from outside of the company. In order to facilitate this, the Connect+Develop innovation
model was created, which produced successful results.
With Crest, P&G had a strong name in the oral care market in the 1990s. However, it
got surpassed by Colgate. Looking for a comeback, P&G focused on disruptive innovation
Alliance system
387
through the C+D programme. This resulted in Crest Whitestrips, which allowed customers
to whiten their teeth in an easy and affordable manner. In 2006, P&G introduced Crest ProHealth, which is a toothpaste that deals with the most common threats to dental health.
Next, in 2010, P&G introduced Crest 3D White, which is an advanced line of oral care products that focuses on improving dental health and aesthetics by the introduction of a product
that whitens teeth in less than two hours. By introducing these products, P&G was able to
retain the lead in the oral care market. With regard to electric toothbrushes, P&G was anxious to introduce a pulsating toothbrush. However, the development was forecast to last
over fve years. Through the C+D programme, P&G established a partnership with a classifed Japanese frm which was producing products that met the needs of P&G. This partnership resulted in the introduction of the Oral-B Pulsonic toothbrush in less than one year.
Like P&G, its competitors also found new ways to innovate their product offerings in
the oral care market. During the 1990s, Philips also found itself in decline. Innovation was
organized in a fragmented way and did not yield the required results. In 1999, the principles
of open innovation were adopted and resulted in the establishment of the world renowned
‘High Tech Campus’. Philips was able to develop appealing new products by setting up alliances with various companies. In 2004, Philips and P&G crossed paths when they announced
a joint venture to co-develop and co-market the IntelliClean System. With IntelliClean, both
companies wanted to attack their largest competitors in the US oral care market: Gillette
and its Oral-B brand. The alliance combined the best companies in the oral health industry,
the technological competence of Philips and P&G in the area of oral care, and added Crest’s
toothpaste expertise. Initially, the IntelliClean was available only through the American Dental Association (ADA), but it was launched in the US consumer market in 2005.
In 2005, P&G embarked on its largest acquisition to date: a $57 billion deal for Gillette
that would create the world’s largest consumer-products company. P&G added Duracell
batteries, Right Guard deodorant and Gillette razors to its more than 300 consumer brands.
P&G’s acquisition of Gillette further intensifed competition in the oral care market. In 2005,
the SpinBrush product line was acquired by Church & Dwight from P&G, the latter divesting its SpinBrush toothbrush business because it competed with Gillette’s Oral-B brand,
which had a better position in the electric toothbrush market. In addition, Gillette was very
competitive and probably had the best power-brushes in the world at that time. However,
P&G’s acquisition of Gillette conficted with its partnership with Philips for the IntelliClean
brand, as Oral-B and IntelliClean competed heavily. Moreover, the US market for rechargeable toothbrushes was highly concentrated, with Gillette and Philips accounting for virtually
all sales of these products. The acquisition would have allowed P&G to acquire the only signifcant competitor to its joint venture partner—Philips—which would have reduced P&G’s
incentives to support the IntelliClean product. Therefore, the agreement between Philips
and P&G was revised to contain non-compete provisions to protect customers’ interests. For
example, P&G and Philips agreed to limit joint activities to the US market only.
Since the Gillette acquisition, P&G has continued its proactive marketing of the Oral-B
brand. For example, it has established multiple relationships with professional dentists and
associated organizations that endorsed the Oral-B brand. In turn, in 2008, Philips Sonicare
partnered with Oral Health America (OHA) to conduct a public opinion survey to reveal the
state of oral health in America. In 2010, Philips Sonicare also formed an alliance with Susan
G. Komen to raise funds for the fght against breast cancer. The power-toothbrush brand
donated $100,000 to the organization and agreed to release a commemorative Sonicare
toothbrush with a pink power button (pink is the offcial colour of the Komen organization).

388
Alliance system
In recent years, advancing technology with regard to connectivity has launched a new
era in the development of oral care. P&G launched the interactive toothbrush in 2015, which
uses Bluetooth 4.0 connectivity to help consumers to improve oral care. Oral-B has successfully developed a strategy in which it connects its toothbrush with a mobile app. This
technology has been developed in partnership with Iconmobile. Philips has taken a similar
path. It has produced an electric toothbrush that has the ability to track areas of the mouth
that have been missed during the brushing routine. Through Bluetooth connectivity, this
data is synchronized with the Philips Sonicare App to help users to improve their brushing
techniques. Especially for children, Philips has developed an app to establish oral care habits
in children. Philips is partnering with 20th Century Fox, allowing children to brush their
teeth with their favourite characters from the Ice Age movie. In 2022, Oral-B Europe teamed
up with the International Association of Disability and Oral Health (iADH) to make oral care
more inclusive and accessible for people with disabilities. Through a joint programme,
called ‘Positive practices’, the partners aim to make oral care more accessible and positive
for all. This partnership also offered Oral-B with an opportunity to enhance its brand to signal ‘inclusiveness’ to its customers. Benjamin (P&G Europe Oral Care Senior Vice President)
said, ‘As a brand, we recognize our responsibility to help ensure that oral care is accessible to
all and we are proud to partner with the iADH to work to improve the experience for people
living with disabilities’.
Co-evolution of partner relationships is of crucial importance in the highly competitive
oral care market. Companies active in the oral care market continuously respond to new
developments and opportunities. This refects in continuously changing partners and partnering structures.

Questions
1
2
Explain how Proctor & Gamble and Philips use acquisitions and alliances to enhance
their competitive positions. What are their diferent motives?
What changes took place on the alliance, partner frm and alliance environment levels,
and how do they afect the alliance system?

Note
1 Brown and Anthony (2011); Businessweek Online (2002); Federal Trade Commission (2006); HFN
Daily News (2010); Oral Health America (2008); PG (2022); Philips (2004); PR Web (2008); Statista
(2017).

26
CONTEMPORARY ALLIANCES
Technological innovation and societal developments are reshaping the business environment
and changing the rules of the alliance game. Because markets change continuously, frms are
pushed to continuously innovate. Industry incumbents focus on technological innovation
(such as blockchain, artifcial intelligence and cloud computing) to improve their products
and services, whereas market entrants take advantage of new technologies to gain a foothold
by delivering enhanced offerings (Christensen et al. 2018).To this end, frms use alliances and
participate in various alliance constellations to formulate and execute innovation strategies
(frst section). In response to societal developments, frms also increasingly participate in alliance arrangements seeking to enact their social responsibility. Whereas some frms opt for
‘green-washing’ to show their social responsibility, others are intrinsically motivated to reconcile a corporate proft-logic with social responsibility practices.To this end, frms establish and
participate in various alliance constellations to effectively navigate and accommodate societal
interests (second section). The emergence of new alliance constellations (see Table 26.1 for
illustrations) raises questions about the relevance of traditional strategic alliance management
explanations.Therefore, we discuss mainstream theoretical perspectives and how they advance
(or not) insight about contemporary alliance manifestations (third section).We end the chapter with concluding insights (fourth section) and a case illustration.

Technological innovation
Technological innovation has become a key driver of a frm’s competitive advantage (Duysters
and de Man 2003). Firms operate in a world characterized by high levels of volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity (VUCA) (Bennis and Nanus 1985). Environments are
changing quickly, drastically and unpredictably. To remain competitive, frms need to formulate and effectuate collaborative strategies that allow them the fexibility to deal with
unexpected and unpredictable changes in their environments (He et al. 2020; Yang et al. 2007).
Being innovative allows frms to take on these challenges. Unsurprisingly, most frms have
adopted open innovation practices—a shift from in-house innovation to leveraging external
parties to accelerate a frm’s innovation (Chesbrough 2003). In contrast to traditional business strategy, which has guided frms to construct barriers to competition, open innovation
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-26
390
Contemporary alliances
TABLE 26.1 Examples of contemporary alliance arrangements
Alliance
Description
Crowd-sourcing
alliance
Quirky and General Electric (GE) forged a crowd-sourcing alliance. Quirky,
offering a social network platform for inventors, helps startup ventures turn ideas
to marketable offerings. GE provides access to patents, improving the offer while
capturing value on unused intellectual property.

Blockchain
alliance
IBM,AIG and Standard Chartered Bank initiated an alliance aimed at devising a
multinational insurance policy based on a blockchain.The blockchain technology
enables a shared, real-time view of policy data and documentation to all partners
involved.The blockchain permits the recording and tracking of events in each
country related to the insurance policy and the automatic execution of payments if
prespecifed conditions are met.

Poverty alliance
The Scottish-based poverty alliance brings together grassroots community
groups, large national NGOs, voluntary organizations, statutory organizations,
trade unions and faith groups to rebalance the distribution of power and
resources. Partners seek to infuence policy and practice, support communities to
reduce poverty, build the anti-poverty movement, and change attitudes through
evidence-based interventions.

Global Energy
Alliance
The Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP) is working in
partnership with countries across Africa,Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean
to operationalize renewable energy transitions and expansions, which will
reduce greenhouse gases, extend clean power to underserved people and enable
green jobs.The partners have built a collective action platform with a radically
collaborative approach, working hand-in-hand with national governments and
global partners and bringing together stakeholders that would otherwise remain
fragmented to enable our country programmes to fourish.

Sources: Bloomberg (2017); Global Energy Alliance (2022); PovertyAlliance (2022); Sterling (2013).

promotes openness beyond immediate frm boundaries and the use of partnerships, even
between competitors. Open innovation, for example, enables frms to become disruptors as
open innovation enables them to enhance their offerings for their existing customers and/or
gain a foothold in new markets by delivering more suitable functionality, frequently at a lower
price. Open innovation in combination with emerging technological developments offers
even more new opportunities as technological advances help frms to transform business
activities, processes and competencies. Consequently, these developments give rise to new
alliance practices and constellations (see Box 26.1 for an illustration).
The emergence of blockchain technology has also changed the alliance landscape. ‘A
blockchain is a cryptography-based decentralized system consisting of an ongoing list of
digital records that are shared within a peer-to-peer network (i.e. a chain of blocks of digital
records)’ (Lumineau et al. 2020, p. 500). Blockchain is used to establish integration over the
internet and can be understood as a many-to-many decentralized integration model, deployed
in the public cloud to conduct secured transactions rapidly and at low cost (He et al. 2020).
Blockchain minimizes unnecessary use of third-party intermediaries and is capable of providing security and fexibility at a lower cost than ‘third party’ transactions.Although blockchain
needs further development (for example, to meet the need for international standardization
of documents), it is regarded as a promising future means of business-to-business transactions.

Contemporary alliances
391
BOX 26.1 MULTI-SIDED PLATFORMS
Companies such as Facebook, Alibaba and Uber are competing in a new multi-sided
platform (MSP) world; the primary focus of frms leading a MSP, from their inception, is to provide digital infrastructure, information and technology-intangible assets
that enable direct interaction or value creation across (global) platforms by linking
diferent user group and complementors. The platform typically ofers a combination of a core technology and a subset of complementary components, which enrich
the functionalities ofered (i.e. ecosystem). Compared to bilateral alliances, value creation is not exclusively dependent on dyadic resource exchange, it is mainly based on
external customer input to drive demand and direct customer interaction to generate
economic value. The platform functions as a broker between a group of end users
and one (or more) group of suppliers which hold the ownership of the products sold
or the resources to deliver services (through the platform). Another unique feature
of MSPs pertains to network externalities: a customer’s utility of using a product or
service through the platform increases with the number of suppliers and customers
using the platform. Furthermore, the platform leader (i.e. actor operating the platform)
may generate additional income by processing data—collected via monitoring platform
transactions—which customers have consented to as they typically have a formal afliation with the platform (i.e. a subscription). Consider Uber, as it has been frequently
used as an example of a MSP. Established in 2009, Uber is a tech-company that connects the physical and digital worlds to ofer mobility as a service at the tap of a button.
Initially using a platform to connect self-enrolled suppliers (i.e. cars with chaufeurs)
and customers (i.e. users), Uber diversifed in food delivery (e.g. Uber Eats), package delivery and freight transportation. Leveraging the platform’s functionality, Uber
forged partnerships with complementors to enhance service value, delivery and quality,
as well as to attract supplier and customers. For example, alliances were forged with
Italian-based IT Taxi (a cab dispatcher) and Cornershop (grocery delivery). That is,
the success of Uber depends on continuously improving the platform’s value to attract
and connect new drivers and customers. Despite several adversities, among which are
concerns about the quality of drivers, security breaches and non-compliance with local
regulations, Uber’s growth remains unchanged.
Sources: Poniatowski et al. (2022); Zeng et al. (2019).

Blockchain will enable many-to-many business transactions, such that short-term and even ad
hoc interfrm partnerships will be feasible. Blockchain holds the promise to solve alliance governance issues, including contractual and relational governance, in making collaborations both
more reliable and faster (Lumineau et al. 2020). This is because Blockchain bypasses humans’
unpredictability and biases and exploits the benefts of automation. Moreover, in a decentralized
blockchain confguration, consensus is achieved such that no party owns all of the decision rights.
Taken together, instead of contractual enforcement by laws and regulations (that is, use of third
parties), or relational enforcement by social norms (partners), blockchain enforces alliances (i.e.
transactions) by a self-contained and automated set of rules (codifcation) (Lumineau et al. 2020).

392
Contemporary alliances
Industry 4.0 is likely to reshape (global) value chains, competition rules and structure
of industries (Dalenogare et al. 2018); it will also fundamentally change the mechanisms of
interfrm relationships. Industry 4.0 is an emerging technology framework based on cyber–
physical systems, coordinated by wireless and internet-based protocols and standards. Industry
4.0 is enabled by some foundational technology advances, such as adaptive robotics, artifcial
intelligence (AI), big data analytics, embedded systems, Internet of Things (IoT), Industrial
Internet, cloud systems, additive manufacturing, and simulation and virtualization technologies (Xu et al. 2018). Industry 4.0 will feature horizontal integration via value chains, vertical
integration and networking of manufacturing or service systems, and end-to-end engineering
of the overall value chain. These developments suggest that the existing business models of
companies will be increasingly data-driven, and new business models will rapidly emerge to
redefne how companies create and deliver value. In addition, digital transformation opens
new networking possibilities and enables cooperation between different actors. For example,
the supply chain network of future frms is likely to be much shorter than it is now, and supply chain partnerships can be extremely short-term and dynamic. For example, in the feld of
urban management, cities are seeking to become smart at dealing with challenges such as air
pollution, traffc congestion, cyber security and fresh food supply. This has encouraged alliances of IT frms possessing specialized knowledge with public authorities.
Blockchain and Industry 4.0 will result in the emergence of new modes of interfrm collaboration, driven by new business models moving towards digitalization and decentralization
of information processing (He et al. 2020).Whereas traditional strategic alliance management
assumes long-term arrangements to create value, guided by technological advances (such as
cloud computing and smart contracts), future alliances will be designed to encompass fexibility and agility, typically with shorter lifecycles. Furthermore, it is unlikely that a single
frm can develop and marketize a new technology—doing so is not economically viable—so
constellations in various forms are likely to emerge, contributing to further industry specialization and division of labour. For example, alliances between auto manufacturers and AI
frms, between oil exploration companies and high-tech companies, between medical device
specialists and IT companies are to be expected.These constellations will also further intensify
coopetition, that is, cooperation between competitors (see Chapter 16). Developments in new
technologies, from cloud computing to blockchain, are making such coopetitive and hybrid
collaborations possible. For example, it is likely that more and more horizontal collaborations,
such as facilities and human resource sharing, will be common practice among (groups of)
competitors (Geurts et al. 2022).As frms participate in multiple technological solutions (such
as digital platforms), alliance partners will occupy different roles simultaneously (for example,
lead frm, complementor or market entrant). Alliance management becomes an ability to
continuously redefne and reposition themselves in the value creation system, fnding suitable
partners, building capabilities and switching between partners when appropriate.

Societal responsibility
Social responsibility means that frms, in addition to maximizing shareholder value, must act
in a manner that contributes to the welfare of society (Tjemkes and Mihalache 2021).Acting
responsibly has become increasingly important to investors, employees, customers and other
stakeholders. For example, the scope of corporate social responsibility (CSR) is no longer
constrained to company headquarters (Agudelo et al. 2019) but instead stretches along its
Contemporary alliances
393
entire, and often global, supply chain and production network (Wickert 2021). Responding to
political, social and economic forces, such as environmental laws and regulations, the United
Nations’ Societal Development Goals (SDGs) and resource depletion, frms have become
increasingly aware that the scope for a business extends beyond making a proft. Specifcally,
more and more frms are conceiving of how to contribute to societal (grand) challenges,
including the achievement of gender equality, safeguarding food supply, contributing to biodiversity and other environmental issues. Resolving societal challenges would require acknowledgement of the tensions originating in the vested interests of stakeholders (see Chapter 24).
If these are not identifed and resolved, problems such as the climate crisis will persist, as
favouring one stakeholder’s interest above the other will invoke resistance and confict. One
way to enact social responsibility is through alliances (Dentoni et al. 2021). Successful collaborative projects are omnipresent. Local communities collectively work together with businesses and municipalities to reduce the local ecological footprint while securing economic
stability. Global corporations collaborate with transnational non-governmental organizations
and other stakeholders to develop global solutions to cross-border challenges. New ways of
organizing emerge, and the emergence of societal alliances has changed the alliance landscape.
Societal alliances are voluntary collaborative efforts of actors from business and non-proft
sectors in which partners attempt to address a social and/or environmental problem of mutual
concern (Yin and Jamali 2021). Particularly essential here are problems pertaining to common public goods (such as poverty, environmental protection, healthcare and education) or
social issues, which are recognized to have spillover effects on multiple constituencies and
stakeholders, going beyond the scope of a single organization (Yin and Jamali 2021). Societal
alliances typically involve two or more diametrically different institutional logics (see Chapter 15). An institutional logic, usually value- and norm-based, provides the assumptions, rules
and beliefs that shape decision making and actions.The business and non-proft actors coming from different sectors to collaborate on the social and environmental cause not only face
conficting organizational values and beliefs that refect broader cultural templates but must
also overcome unfamiliarity to develop a solid level of trust and comfort for shared goals. For
example,Yin and Jamali (2021) showed that successful societal alliances can reconcile opposing institutional logics, such that the partners frame societal challenges as an opportunity
and collectively assume ownership to enact practices in support of women’s empowerment,
improved employee engagement and social innovation, among others. Since the scope of the
challenge, the identities of the partners and the interactions between them are often infuenced by one or more shared institutional logics; creating and maintaining a societal alliance
requires partners to integrate multiple and potentially incompatible logics.
Environmental alliances are a common response to societal sustainability demands (Wassmer et al. 2014). In environmental alliances, frms collaboratively exploit and explore environmental technologies to address market opportunities while simultaneously generating positive
environmental impacts (Lin 2012).These alliance arrangements typically involve actors from
the private sector, the public sector and non-governmental organizations who collectively (or
bilaterally) generate positive environmental value and/or knowledge value from innovations
in environmental technologies (Niesten and Jolink 2020). For example, environmental alliances seek to create a positive (or mitigate negative) impact on domains of climate change,
energy effciency, forestry renewal, decarbonization, clean water and so on. Furthermore, the
knowledge gained from an environmental innovation spills over to other frms and society at
large that beneft from the R&D investments of the alliance. For example, Sadovnikova and
394
Contemporary alliances
Pujari (2017) showed that announcements of green marketing partnerships have an immediate positive and signifcant effect on shareholder value, whereas announcements of green
technology partnerships produce an immediate negative and signifcant effect (with a delayed
positive effect). By contrast, Sanzo-Pérez and Álvarez-González (2022) showed that social
enterprises partnering with frms that support their goals are more likely to attain sustainability and transformational impact of the innovation, countervailing the short-term orientation
of frms.
A circular economy pertains to a zero-waste economic system.Transitioning from linear to
circular production systems requires interactions that include cross-sectoral collaboration in
ecosystems (Panwar and Niesten 2022).Although the number of individual businesses adopting principles of the circular economy has been growing globally, economy-wide transformations have not yet emerged. It is important to note that circularity-oriented practices are more
likely to become effective when companies adopt circular business models rather than marginally updating their existing business models. A key element for circular business models is
to build a closed-loop supply chain. It requires that frms closely monitor their supply chains,
which may sometimes be achieved through using such tracing techniques as blockchain. In
other cases, frms may have to take more radical actions, such as developing local production
and consumption networks. Lead frms can aid this transformation from linear to circular
by taking an ecosystem approach and by cultivating collective capacities of their ecosystem
partners, including suppliers, customers, local communities and regulators. Alliances are thus
crucial to system-wide improvements that the circular economy entails (Niesten and Jolink
2020). For example, Köhler and colleagues (2022) report on the Circle House project, a lighthouse project in the Danish construction sector, and showed that open innovation supports
circular value creation, while collaborative capabilities enable partners to remain an innovative
frontrunner through quick adaptations to a dynamic environment. Ho and colleagues (2022)
develop a boundary framework for understanding the interplay between business and civil
society in circular economy transitions. For example, in campaign-based boundary work, civil
society organizations exert pressure on frms to deal with end-of-use products, and frms
respond with low-level circular economy innovations such as better recycling mechanisms,
whereas in resource-effciency-based boundary work, civil society organizations collaborate
more closely with frms to jointly implement ‘reduce and reuse’ strategies that not only
reduce pollution but also deliver cost savings. Taken together, in the environmental realm,
the value manifests in the form of eco-effciency, waste removal and reduction in pollution
and resource use.These gains occur due in large part to open communication among alliance
partners (or ecosystem members) that aids in effectively closing the loop and redesigning
business processes. Partners are also able to generate economic rent for themselves mainly
in the form of cost savings and competitive advantage. The emergence of complex alliance
constellations, such as purpose ecosystems (Stubbs et al. 2022), enables all private, public and
societal partners to reconcile economic goals with societal impact (Table 26.2).

Theoretical implications for strategic alliance management
Technological innovation and social responsibility will reshape the way companies collaborate
with partners, either vertically, horizontally or concentrically, as well as how alliances operate and are managed. Unmistakably, these developments affect the alliance landscape, which
raises the question whether traditional notions of strategic alliance management will become
obsolete. Next, we use the resource-based view (RBV), transaction cost economics (TCE)
Contemporary alliances
395
TABLE 26.2 Contemporary alliances: description and implications
Description
Drivers (examples)
Implications for alliance management
Technological
innovation
Multi-lateral and
multi-sector alliances
to develop and
marketize technological
innovation.

Blockchain, cloud
computing, artifcial
intelligence, digital
platforms.

• Increasing levels of
ambidexterity, decentralization
and openness.
• Emergence of new
(automated) governance
mechanisms.

Societal
responsibility
Multi-lateral and
multi-sector alliances to
mitigate societal threats
and capture (business)
opportunities.

UN-SDG, circular
economy, climate
crisis, inequality,
social movements.

• Increasing levels of confict,
opposing interests and
coordination complexity.
• Emergence of new
mechanisms to internalize
external value.

Sources: He et al. (2020); Niesten and Jolink (2020).

and institutional theory (IT) to highlight implications (see Chapter 2 for details on these
theoretical perspectives).
Drawing on the RBV, technological and societal alliances enable alliance partners to share
resources (such as blockchain technology and waste and by-products), capabilities and information.According to RBV logic, frms use alliances to develop new technology or to advance
environmental sustainability business models, which enhances their competitive advantage
(He et al. 2020). In other words, frms can economically proft from technological and societal
alliances as alliance partners share value resources, reduce risks, respond to external pressures
and invest in co-development of resources. But, changing customer expectations of frms
in terms of technological innovation and social responsibility, while providing products and
services at lower cost, greater speed and with better customization, implies that frms need to
collaborate more widely to continuously enhance their resource endowments. This implies
that the RBV’s imperfect mobility assumption is challenged (He et al. 2020) as the transfer of information and knowledge is becoming highly dynamic and open, enabled by new
business models and seamless technology solutions.Technological and societal developments
may render existing resource endowments obsolete. As a frm’s future competitive advantage
originates in resource sharing between alliance partners, protection of key resources will be
increasingly important, for example, via enhanced cyber security and intellectual property
regarding sustainability initiatives.
Drawing on TCE, one inference is that technological and societal developments enable
alliance partners to reduce transaction costs, rendering alternative governance modes and
forms effcient (see Chapters 2 and 5). Although design costs (such as automation and algorithms) could come with substantial investments, blockchain governance, for example, may
reduce searching, monitoring and enforcement costs, specifcally when transactions are codifable and verifable (for example, selling insurance). Also, investments in specifc assets for
sustainability enhance cooperation between alliance partners and generate environmental
value (Niesten and Jolink 2020). Asset-specifc investments provide partners with incentives
to avoid misappropriation of societal value while promoting the development of joint activities. However, TCE explanations fall short in terms of explaining how effcient transactions
interrelate with collectively created value. For example, in an open society, technology is not
396
Contemporary alliances
only more likely to be codifed and disclosed via patents, but, because of the desirability of
(green) technologies, frms might be under pressure to share those in the public domain to
facilitate the diffusion of technological and social innovations.
Taking IT as reference, frms form technological and societal alliances to generate value to
deal with external pressures from customers, regulators and other stakeholders. For example,
environmental activism and lawsuits, mobilizing public sentiment, altering accepted norms,
withdrawing important resources and lobbying governments prompt frms to enter into
environmental alliances to offer greener products, inform consumers on sustainability and
motivate suppliers to adopt more sustainable practices (Niesten and Jolink 2020). Technical
and societal alliances create new industry norms and standards and lobby for new rules and
regulations to promote the digital and societal transition. IT analyzes the build-up of partners’
legitimacy as they collaborate. However, legitimization of initiatives can only be expected
when alliance partners communicate about their technological and societal improvements.
Because these traditional theoretical perspectives tend to negate the dynamics invoked by
technological and societal forces, alternative explanations are needed to explain the motives
and management of emerging dynamic and fexible alliance constellations. For example, the
relevance of the RBV has become partly superseded by the dynamic capability view (Teece
et al. 1997) as the latter offers insights into a frm’s alliance capability building and deployment, which is needed when a frm is confronted with technological and market disruption. A frm’s ability to combine heterogeneous sources of knowledge and to mobilize such
knowledge to commercial ends will become a defning success factor. In addition, the multistakeholder involvement in the business ecosystem suggests the need to integrate stakeholder theory (Freeman 1984) into strategic alliance management explanations. For example,
emerging alliance constellations encompass various stakeholders, and a better understanding
is needed to refect the changing role of stakeholders in technological and societal alliances
and ecosystems. Such advances would also require a reconceptualization of alliance performance to include not only stakeholders’ interests (e.g. economic, ecological, technological
and societal) but also agility and adaptation to the changing environment and expectations.
In sum, new perspectives will need to explain the emerging motives behind emerging alliance forms and the cost–beneft balance between switching to new alliances and alliance
ecosystems driven by new opportunities and the maintenance of relationships (LeipämaaLeskinen et al. 2022).

Summary
Technological innovation and social responsibility increase the level of uncertainty and complexity that frms need to consider when developing and executing their alliance strategies.
Firms are challenged to proactively seek collaboration with a wide range of (new) partners.
These emergent alliance forms embody a shift from competition to cooperation, from frmcentred to multi-centred, from closedness to openness, and from control to orchestration.
Understanding of these new alliance constellations, which are established in environments
in which organizational boundaries become increasingly blurred, demands understanding
of collaborative engagement. It requires decision makers to be able to manage decentralized
cross-sector alliances, lead and participate in virtual collaborations, and navigate coopetitive and hybrid partnerships, either as bilateral arrangements or as part of a multi-layered
ecosystem.

Contemporary alliances
397
CASE: TORVALD KLAVENESS
1
Shipping is a vital source for economic development. Approximately 80 per cent of the
world’s trade volume and about 70 per cent of trade value are transported by ships. The true
importance of shipping became apparent in 2021 when the ‘Ever Given’ got stuck in the
Suez Canal, resulting in a blockage that lasted for six full days. Analysts have calculated that
this blockage resulted in economic damages of roughly $400 million per hour. Shipping is
a vital link in world trade and will remain in the years to come. At the same time, shipping
is also polluting. At the time of writing, the shipping industry accounts for 3.5 to 4 per cent
of all climate change emissions, primarily by emitting carbon dioxides. These exhaust gasses
also result in local atmospheric pollution. Next, the discharge of ballast water can negatively
impact local ecosystems as ballast water contains biological elements which are foreign to
those ecosystems. Shipping also impacts wildlife, whether through propellors’ collisions
with marine mammals or sound pollution from engines, which can impact species who
rely on sound for navigation and orientation. Shipping companies are increasingly aware
of these problems, and some are actively striving to improve environmental performance.
One such company is the Norwegian Torvald Klaveness (TK). In 1946, Torvald Klaveness
founded the company aiming at providing technical management and Norwegian seafarers
to the American shipping industry. Shortly after, he started in ship brokering and contracted
its frst vessel, the MV Bilbao, in 1950. The company moved further into bulk carriers in the
1950s and 1960s, using innovative ships and the ability to establish long-lasting relationships with customers and partners. Today that same pioneering character is still part of
the culture. TK’s vision is to improve the ‘nature’ of shipping. Decarbonization, improving
cost effectiveness and increasing resilience are the main themes supporting that vision, and
within those themes, the adoption of new technologies and services to increase shipping
effciency and reduce its environmental footprint is vital. This vision is very much carried by
the company’s owners and leadership team. The relevance of shipping companies will be
determined by their ability to offer their services while taking account of their environmental
impact. The company now exists of fve business units, one of them being ZeroLab, which
was established in 2021.
ZeroLab’s ambition is to make decarbonization of seaborne supply chains a reality for
cargo customers. Specifcally, ZeroLab partners with ambitious cargo owners who want
to lead the way in creating a market for low-carbon deep sea shipping. In setting up this
business unit, the company could build on the experiences it already had gained setting
up Klaveness Digital. Guided by customer centricity, ZeroLab used an internally validated
approach to develop a business around decarbonization. For example, understanding the
challenges which lie further down the supply chain was crucial in focusing the activities of
both Klaveness Digital and ZeroLab. Cargo owners are increasingly confronted by requests
for transparency regarding their carbon footprint and effciency. An increased focus on costs,
combined with increasing requirements on environmental impact, requires companies to
have more insight on their supply chains. Direct emissions and emissions from purchased
energy, known respectively as Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions, have been the focus of data
collection and reporting in industrial companies for some time now. The next frontier—
indirect emissions, known as Scope 3 emissions—is now coming on to the radar as companies are drafting strategies to accomplish net zero targets. Thus, whereas decarbonization as
a theme was recognized, no concrete demand for decarbonization services (including Scope 3)
398
Contemporary alliances
exists. To develop and enhance its service offering, ZeroLab has engaged in dialogues with
customers to identify shorter and longer term needs. This resulted in pilots in which TK and
customers worked together in developing products and services. To ensure commitment
on both ends, pilot customers pay a fee to TK to cover part of the expenses. Next a ‘fail fast’
strategy is used, thereby quickly stopping initiatives that pose insuffcient value for customers. Utilizing the broad competencies, experience and networks of TK, ZeroLab joined forces
with Klaveness Digital to successfully introduce ‘Emissions’, an interactive emissions monitoring solution, enabling users to follow the greenhouse gasses (GHG) footprint of shipments in total, per commodity, per trade lane, and over time and drill down to understand
how a specifc initiative is performing, forecast emissions based on planned shipments and
obtain insights for sustainability reporting and performance management.
In the early days of ZeroLab, the level of sophistication of many ideas and concepts
proved too high, and direction had to be altered. Many pivots were made before traction
was shown for services that provided basic insight into emissions. This has resulted in a more
layered approach for ZeroLab. It develops services on three layers. The frst layer is aimed
at the visualization of current performance and focuses on the ability to present data. For
example, (potential) customers can conduct a ZeroLab Health Check—a quick carbon risk
assessment of a seaborne supply chain to enable a realistic and cost-effcient strategy for
shipping emissions, including a benchmark with the industry average. The second layer is
the ability to add intelligence to that data, that is, the ability to interpret the data, resulting
in a better understanding of cause–effect relationships. The third layer focuses on actions
which can be taken to infuence, in this case, the actual emissions (i.e. through the ‘Emissions’ digital service application).
In developing and enhancing services, the customer is always centric. ZeroLab is collaborating with internal and external stakeholders. The early phases required extensive
experimentation and testing with customers. To provide for the required fexibility, these
relationships were not overly formalized and heavily relied on the interpersonal skills to
keep parties aligned. Important collaborating partners are other divisions within TK to harness their competencies and expertise. The shipping divisions which have extensive knowledge on ship operations and management. Klaveness Digital, which has ample knowledge
on harvesting data, presents data but also business models. Since decarbonization is an
important topic in the wider shipping industry, Klaveness ZeroLab is also actively involved
in fora discussing decarbonization. As a signatory of the Sea Cargo Charter—a framework
for assessing and disclosing the climate alignment of ship chartering activities around the
globe—ZeroLab proactively promotes transparency about emissions. Through its membership in the Global Maritime Forum, ZeroLab proactively participates in various committees
striving to push decarbonization in shipping. The proposition of ‘carbon pricing’ could be
benefcial for TK, as this would further increase demand in the services being developed.
External stakeholders and potential clients are being informed and inspired through publications and webcasts showing the importance of decarbonization and the potential of the
services which can be provided by TK.
As industry dynamics change, services and business models change as does the way frms
interact with their clients. TK has been moving from a pure shipping company to a more
service-oriented company. This has resulted in new business models and new revenue
streams. It also leads to an increasing complexity for both customers and the standing organization. Questions arise: who is the customer facing entity? How are revenue streams being
Contemporary alliances
399
aligned? How are priorities being set regarding specifc customers and how the organization
incentives its divisions? In managing these potential tensions, ZeroLab has taken the route of
active personal engagement instead of a formal contractual route. The Senior Vice President
responsible for ZeroLab directly reports to the CEO, ensuring leadership support. ZeroLab
is providing added value, mainly through the shipping divisions of TK, reducing the potential for internal tensions. Success is primarily measured based on revenue and the ability to
strengthen the customer relationships. As ZeroLab makes its services more widely available
to the market, it will lead to further adoption of tools and services which will improve shipping effciency and lower carbon emissions. Klaveness is a family-owned customer centric
shipping company; it has a long-term perspective and ensures a commitment to directly
and indirectly reduce carbon emissions, thereby improving the nature of shipping. ZeroLab
plays a key role in that vision.

Questions
1
2
3
Torvald Klaveness is responding to technological and societal developments. Explain
why partnering, in addition to internal development, constitutes a tool in efectuating
its strategic ambitions.
Explain how Torvald Klaveness’ alliance approach supports the company’s innovative
and societal goals. What role do customers fulfl in the alliance portfolio?
How does Torvald Klaveness’ internal organization support its external (alliance)
organization?

Note
1 Interview with Klaveness senior executive;Andriessa (2022); Kalouptsidi (2021);Wikipedia (2022)
27
STRATEGIC ALLIANCE MANAGEMENT
Science and art
A thorough understanding of strategic alliance management is a prerequisite for the twentyfrst century, when successful alliances are, and will continue to become increasingly, critical
strategic tools in frms’ competitive arsenals. They appear in many forms and offer a wide
range of benefts—economies of scale, reduced competition, innovation, sustainability and
profts, to name just a few. Paradoxically, even as frms increase their focus on and use of
alliances, failure rates seem to keep climbing.To disentangle the difference between alliance
success and failure, we have connected existing theoretical and practical insights to present a
much needed, coherent, academically grounded development framework of strategic alliance
management that comprises eight separate but related development stages: alliance strategy
formulation, partner selection, alliance negotiation, alliance design, alliance launch, alliance
management, alliance evaluation and alliance termination.We also have elaborated on rationales for decision-making steps for each stage. Failure might also be attributed to an unawareness of the alliance practices associated with establishing alliances with unique objectives
(for example, learning alliances), diverging partner characteristics (for example, international
alliances) and distinct alliance constellations (for example, business ecosystems). Consequently,
we have supplemented the generic insights with specifc decision-making rationales and steps.
Because alliance failure is more likely when frms fail to embed alliance experience in their
organizational processes, we have also detailed how frms can use alliance professionals, manage alliance teams, and build and deploy their alliance capabilities. Finally, we discussed three
unique alliance challenges: building an alliance mindset, navigating the alliance system and
embracing the emergence of new alliance constellations.
As a whole, this book suggests that alliances can be purposively and almost scientifcally
designed and managed to achieve success. By applying the alliance development framework,
managers will be able to organize their alliance decision making systematically.Yet alliances
are dynamic organizational arrangements, and decision makers still confront a wide range of
contingencies that often affect alliance processes and outcomes adversely.The insights in this
book deal with a substantial number of contingencies, but no list can be exhaustive. Successful
strategic alliance management also necessitates practices that extend beyond an instrumental
approach.The practices of an artist describe an alliance professional who creatively and intuitively resolves adversities and creates opportunities. To elaborate on our view that strategic
DOI: 10.4324/9781003222187-27
Strategic alliance management
401
Alliance
management
stages
launch
management
evaluation
termination
Alliance
formation
stages
strategy
partner selection
negotiation
design
ART
SCIENCE
Alliance attributes
alliance objectives
alliance partners
alliance
constellations
Alliance experience
Deep know-how and knowwhat of alliance practices,
industry and organization
Alliance creativity
Perspective flexibility, out-ofthe-box solutions, new rules
Alliance challenges
alliance mindset
alliance system
contemporary
alliances
Alliance leadership
Situational leadership,
reflexive practices,
empowerment
Alliance competence
alliance professionals
alliance teams
alliance capabilities
FIGURE 27.1
Strategic alliance management: science and art
alliance management constitutes both a science and an art (see Figure 27.1), we conclude
this book by detailing the science of alliance management, followed by a discussion of its art.
We end by outlining several future themes that we expect to become salient to the feld of
strategic alliance management.

The science of strategic alliance management
A scientifc approach to strategic alliance management entails the development of a coherent
set of theories that inform objective and systematic decision making.The raison d’être of theory is to reduce the complexity of the empirical world by developing and testing theoretical
explanations and predictions (Bacharach 1989).A rigorous theory can be generalized beyond
the specifc context in which it originated.The alliance development framework presented in
this book thus draws on wide-ranging theoretical perspectives used by various academics to
explain alliance phenomena.That is, the framework and derived decision-making guidelines
are well grounded academically.

402
Strategic alliance management
Yet there are some limitations to the framework. Some theories aim to explain the same
alliance phenomena, but their different approaches and assumptions make the related research
fndings diffcult or even impossible to compare (Bell et al. 2006; Lumineau and Oliveira
2018). For example, transaction cost economics predicts the conditions, such as asset specifcity, frequency or uncertainty, in which certain governance forms are most effcient (Williamson 1981). Thus the theory is normative and prescriptive. The institutional approach is
incompatible with such normative assumptions (Teng 2005) because its underlying notion
that alliances are inherently behavioural responses to external pressures means there is no need
for an effcient governance form. Studies from these two distinct theoretical perspectives are
therefore essentially incomparable. In addition, many theories provide only partial explanations. For example, the resource-based view states that an alliance should be terminated if
the missing resources or capabilities have been captured or are no longer needed. However,
little guidance exists regarding the possibility of changing resource needs in relation to a
particular alliance. Although a co-evolutionary view on alliances provides some insights into
the relationships between learning and adaptation within an alliance system, the explanations
are often confned to specifc elements (e.g. environmental dynamics, alliance design or alliance management). No single, unique theoretical perspective can provide a coherent set of
explanations for deriving systematic guidelines for successful strategic alliance management.
To overcome these limitations, we have drawn on multiple (though certainly not all)
theoretical perspectives to arrive at a coherent set of guidelines for alliance decision making.
Because alliances depict socially and economically complex organizational entities operating
in a continuously changing environment, consisting of members whose mindsets and interests
are likely to shape the relationship, the implications of our academically grounded framework
can only go so far.Whereas the science of strategic alliance management values stability, consistency, linearity and simplicity, the art of strategic alliance management draws on principles
such as continuous change, inconsistency, non-linearity and complexity.

The art of strategic alliance management
The foundation for our claim that strategic alliance management constitutes an art that is
informed by science is our recognition of alliances as inherently complex organizational
arrangements. To reduce this complexity, we have disentangled alliance development systematically into separate and manageable parts (see also the strategic alliance management
checklist in the Appendix); however, we also note that alliance managers confront opposing,
and occasionally mutually exclusive, forces that if left unattended will destroy the alliance.
Furthermore, to maintain internal and external alignment, alliances are in a constant fux of
learning and adaptation. Also new unknown alliance constellations have emerged, offering
new opportunities but also additional coordination complexities. Blueprints, checklists and
frameworks are not designed to help alliance managers with these challenges. Strategic alliance management demands, in addition to academic knowledge, the experience, creativity
and leadership of alliance managers.
Alliance experience is critical for alliance managers to perform their tasks effectively.Typically, successful alliance managers have deep understanding about the industry, the organization and alliance practices. For example, in fnalizing the book, we conducted multiple
interviews with alliance professionals.Though their industry and functional expertise varied,
consistently they indicate that their effectiveness originates in their deep knowledge of their
own organizations. Understanding the functioning of the formal and informal organization
Strategic alliance management
403
and their ability to source internal knowledge, resources and staff enables them to successfully forge and manage alliance arrangements. Perhaps more often than not, alliance managers need to circumvent the organizational hierarchy to safeguard alliance performance. As
alliances bring about multiple disciplines (e.g. legal, R&D, distribution, production, etc.),
savvy alliance managers also develop strong interpersonal networks, within their organizations but also crossing organizational boundaries.These networks function as repositories of
information, enabling alliance professionals to overcome blind spots in their decision making.
Building experience comes with practice; using it to enhance strategic alliance management
entails an art.
Successful alliances come with creative solutions which are typically not described in text
books. As alliances evolve, managers must address seemingly contradictory, or even mutually
exclusive, forces.To resolve these tensions, alliance managers should attempt to reconcile the
opposing forces creatively; there is no logical way to put the opposites together in an internally consistent pattern. Possessing a tension-based mindset, alliance managers understand
the practice of reconciliation—an intrinsic skill to develop out-of-the-box solutions. Across
alliance professionals we interviewed, consensus exists that tools, frameworks and checklist
provide guidance and insights, but decision-support systems do not make choices or provide
creative solutions. Alliance negotiations are concluded as negotiators develop non-standard
incentive schemes to ensure equitable distribution of value among alliance partners. Alliance
designs are formalized as professionals creatively reconcile alliance organization, governance
form, alliance contract and management control mechanisms. Alliance management drives
the alliance forward as alliance managers creatively resolve adversities, challenges and conficts.
The alliance artist embraces perspective fexibility—the skill to direct alliance partners to
focus both on safeguarding alliance progress and on developing and capturing new, potentially
incompatible, opportunities.
Strategic alliance management necessitates leadership: leadership of oneself, leadership
within the organization and leadership across organizational boundaries. A real alliance artist
adopts the practice of refexive action to successfully navigate dynamic, disruptive and unpredictable (alliance) environments.They continuously refect on their behaviours and practices
(i.e. self-awareness) as to understand who they are and how they are perceived by others.
Several consulted alliance professionals indicate that one misspoken word or sentence can
cause an (international) alliance negotiation to break down, or lead to the termination of a
successful alliance arrangement. Enhanced self-awareness enables alliance managers to walk
the tightrope: advancing individual interests while safeguarding their counterparts’ interests.
Confronted with various intra- and inter-organizational situations (e.g. harmonious, conficts,
adversities), alliance artists also possess an ability to match their leadership style with unique
decision-making situations. For example, an ability to shift between shared and transformational leadership ensures the smooth functioning of alliance teams. Leaders empower alliance
team members to make decisions, while simultaneously promoting collective sense-making
processes about the team goals and the team’s role in the alliance arrangement.The ultimate
alliance leadership goal is to forge alliances that are ready to not only beneft in the present
but also be prepared for an unexpected future or, more ambitiously, to create the very future
that makes current capabilities obsolete.
To conclude, although strategic alliances can improve a frm’s competitive advantage, they
are also inherently fragile, unstable and diffcult to manage.Whereas the ‘science’ element of
strategic alliance management advances informed and systematic decision making, alliance
managers need to trust their competences to resolve challenges and adversities. Moreover,
404
Strategic alliance management
confronted with new forms of alliances, the alliance artist understands that contemporary
strategic alliance management embodies a shift from competition to cooperation, from frmcentred to multi-centred, from closedness to openness, and from control to orchestration
(Tjemkes 2022). This shift may render some traditional instrumental approaches obsolete,
necessitating a change in thinking, but in any case, it reemphasizes the salience of the art of
strategic alliance management. Not understanding or neglecting the art of strategic alliance
management may upset the status quo, leading to premature alliance dissolution.An in-depth
understanding of both science and art will help alliance managers better predict, prevent and
even deal with specifc challenges in their own alliance situations. By combining the alliance development framework in this book with their own managerial experience, creativity
and leadership, alliance managers can formulate and implement the right decisions for each
unique alliance situation they confront.

The future of strategic alliance management
In this book we provide a coherent and comprehensive understanding of strategic alliance management. During the writing process though, novel ideas kept emerging, both in academia and
in practice. Unfortunately, we have not been able to incorporate all these brand-new insights
in our book, although on the positive side, this trend suggests a bright future for strategic alliance management, as refected by numerous review articles presenting directions for future
research, including university–industry collaborations (Ankrah and Al-Tabbaa 2015), governance and performance of international alliances (Christoffersen 2013; Contractor and Reuer
2014; Li et al. 2015), supply chain management (Grimm et al. 2015), societal alliances (Niesten
and Jolink 2020), alliance dynamics (Majchrzak et al. 2014), alliance termination (Nemeth and
Nippa 2013; Rajan et al. 2020), alliance capabilities (Kohtamäki et al. 2018; Niesten and Jolink
2015; Wang and Rajagopalan 2015), business ecosystems (Cobben et al. 2022; Gomes et al.
2018), digital transformation (He et al. 2020), coopetition (Corbo et al. 2022), alliance teams
(van der Kamp et al. 2022), the dark-side of alliances (Oliveira and Lumineau 2019) and alliance performance issues (Christoffersen et al. 2014; Niesten and Stefan 2019; Ryan-Charleton
et al. 2022). Here, we detail four especially promising areas of interest.
First, mainstream alliance research (still) focuses primarily on alliance governance, with
the argument that governance constitutes the primary antecedent of superior alliance performance. However, in line with our alliance development framework, we suggest that some
development stages (or elements within stages) may require future attention.
•
•
Negotiations behaviour. Building on prior alliance negotiations research (see Chapter 4), future studies could explore a variety of topics: how can alliance managers achieve
favourable processes and outcomes during alliance (re)negotiations? What causes frms to
initiate renegotiations? What effect do distinct negotiations behaviours have on alliance
development? How does opportunistic behaviour manifest itself during alliance negotiations? How do individual (re)negotiation behaviours affect alliance progress?
Alliance launch. Though critical to alliance success, little prior academic work exists
detailing on the drivers and mechanisms required to execute an alliance (see Chapter 6).
Research may set out to address a variety of questions: when and how should a launch
manager become involved? What would make an effective kick-off meeting? How to
organize a hand-off? How to deal with the immediate tension between contract application and trust-building? What are critical decisions during the frst 100 days?

Strategic alliance management
•
•
405
Alliance performance. Though the majority of alliance research tends to focus on
alliance performance, research tends to neglect the multifaceted nature of alliance performance (see Chapters 8–9). Questions that warrant answers include the following: to
what extent do antecedents of performance differ from under-performance? What type
of intervention (e.g. behaviour, process, structure) is likely to revitalize an alliance? When
should an alliance be terminated, such that dissolution does not occur before objective
realization or continue after objective realization? How does the interplay between value
creation and appropriation affect alliance functioning? How do different alliance performance motives interrelate regarding activities, resources and investments necessitated?
Disruptions and shocks. Prior alliance literature primarily focused on stability and
performance of alliance arrangements, with some exceptions seeking to understand how
internal disruption can be mitigated and resolved through changes in formal and relational governance (e.g. Keller et al. 2021). However, in addition to internal disruptions,
external shocks, such as pandemics, natural disasters and (fnancial) crises, are likely to
infuence the formation and management of alliance arrangements (see Chapter 25).
Questions guiding future research include the following: how do different forms of disruption infuence alliance functioning and performance? What preemptive and ex-post
mechanisms can be installed to mitigate the impact of disruptions? How do external
shocks impact alliance formation decisions? What alliance portfolio confgurations buffer
against external shocks? How do alliance objectives (e.g. supplier and learning) and partners’ attributes (e.g. asymmetry in size and organizational structure) infuence the partner
frms’ ability to cope with disruptions and shocks?

Second, as we have argued throughout this book, alliance processes and managers’ behaviours constitute equally important predictors of alliance success. Research on alliance processes and behaviour is advancing (see Chapter 7 for example), but several topics remain open
as potentially fruitful research avenues:
•
•
Alliance teams. Following in the steps of some recent studies (see Chapter 22), research
should explore the relationships among alliance team composition, team processes
and team outcomes, such as leadership, decision making, learning and conficts, while
accounting for different types of teams (e.g. negotiation team versus joint venture board)
and unique alliance objectives (e.g. supplier versus learning alliance). In addition, alliance
arrangements constitute a system of teams (i.e. multi-team system) from both partners
and the alliance. Research should explore the dynamics across this set of teams, as well as
among individual team members, and explore topics such as goal hierarchies, team interdependencies, inter-team linkages, boundary spanning and the role of informal networks.
Alliance professionals. At the core, alliance professionals make or break an alliance
arrangement (see Chapter 21). A better understanding is required about the roles alliance professionals fulfl and which competences and personality traits enable them to
work effectively. Or, how alliance professionals construct and deal with tensions (see
Chapter 24). Research may explore these topics while focusing on specifc topics, such
as contract design and application, trust-building and opportunism, handling of emotion and conficts, and knowledge creation and sharing. In addition, future research may
explore how alliance managers use language (e.g. style, fuency and metaphors) to facilitate alliance decision making and processes. Furthermore, how do alliance professionals
construct tensions (e.g. as opposed to trade-offs and frictions)? How do they deal with
406
•
Strategic alliance management
tensions, and under what conditions does tension resolution result in (un)favourable
outcomes?
Alliances and ICT. The information and communication technology (ICT) revolution
has already affected how digital transformation drives the emergence of new alliancebased business models and how new alliance constellations (see Chapter 26) function, yet
how this transformation affects alliance functioning remains an underexplored theme.
So how might virtual working provide opportunities for employees in geographically
dispersed locations to communicate, share and collaborate so as to achieve private and
common goals? How should partners optimize workfows in alliances? How can ICT
tools enable social activities in alliances, including fnding and getting in contact with
people, sharing information and working together? How can frms build, participate and
generate value through digital collaboration in various alliance constellations, including
portfolios, networks and ecosystems?

Third, with few notable exceptions, most alliance research has adopted a static approach
(i.e. cross-sectional, single level of analysis).To advance understanding about strategic alliance
management, we need a dynamic perspective to disentangle presumed causal relationships,
resolve inconclusive results and unravel multi-level explanations. The following topics may
provide inputs for research endeavours:
•
•
Alliances as dynamic entities. Though studies provide insights in the development
of alliance arrangements, suggesting that successful alliances exhibit patterns of proactive
change caused by a recognition to reconcile partner differences and characterized by
complex learning and feedback loops (see Chapters 3 and 7), future research may explore
a variety of topics to provide a better understanding of the dynamics of alliance evolution.
Research questions may focus on the following: what feedback and learning mechanisms
drive governance adaptations, and what underlying mechanisms enable these adaptations?
How do pre-formation dynamics inhibit or facilitate post-formation development? To
what extent, and how, do formal and informal governance mechanisms in concert drive
alliance development? And how and under what conditions may alliance instability generate positive alliance outcomes? These and other questions (e.g. learning and contracting
dynamics) may also be explored at the portfolio and network levels of analysis.
Alliances as multi-level entities. Studies should explore the dynamics between different levels of analysis (Faems et al. 2008; Lumineau and Oliveira 2018; Salvato et al. 2017),
including internal organizational dynamics, alliance functioning and outcomes, and
external contingencies (Brattström et al. 2020; Le Roy and Fernandez 2015; Lipparini et al.
2014), while focusing on varied, alliance-related phenomena: how do communication,
trust and contracting within and between different levels of partner organizations enable
or hinder collaborative activities across partners? How do coalition dynamics at different levels within partner organizations, as well as within the alliance, affect one another?
What are the differences and tensions in alliance management between alliances initiated
at operational or strategic levels? In addition, future research may explore the interrelatedness between individual, team, alliance and network levels of analysis and focus on
questions such as the following: how do individual behaviours affect team functioning
and alliance progress, and vice versa? Under what conditions are which coordination
mechanisms effective to align interests across team- and alliance-levels of analysis? To
Strategic alliance management
•
407
what extent do different alliance network structures enable or inhibit alliance formation,
management and performance, and vice versa?
Alliance capabilities. Research tends to converge on the salience of alliance capabilities
(see Chapter 23) but not on the answers to several remaining issues. In what conditions
do internally (e.g. alliance) and externally (e.g. consultants) sourced functions become
substitutes or complements? How do alliance capabilities develop over time? How can
frms optimize the deployment of alliance capabilities? Regarding contemporary alliance
arrangements, what new alliance capabilities (e.g. multi-lateral, openness, cross-sector)
would be effective?

Fourth, alliances have become increasingly popular, so new alliance types and constellations
keep emerging (Chapter 26). It is important to understand the make-up, motives and management of these new forms; the quality of alliance governance is likely conditioned by the
type of alliance chosen:
•
•
•
Business ecosystems. In traditional and emerging industries, such as the fnancial,
IT and services sectors, (platform-based) ecosystems seem to have replaced traditional
partnerships as the most dominant form of collaboration. Business ecosystems, conceived
as a constellation of multiple alliances, bring about new governance challenges which
warrant future research (see Chapter 20).What would constitute an effcient design and
effective ecosystem management approach? How are value creation and value appropriation interrelated in business ecosystems? How can ecosystem members fulfl different
ecosystem roles while participating in multiple ecosystems? What business and incentive
models are effective (e.g. equitable distribution of value) to promote collaboration within
business ecosystems? Which coordination mechanisms enable ecosystem leaders to align
multiple partners’ interests? How to withdraw from a business ecosystem? To what extent
vary explanations across ecosystem types?
Multi-sided platforms. While scholars have explored the competitive dynamics of
platform ecosystems (see Chapters 20 and 26), less attention has been given to the de
novo creation and expansion of multi-sided platform ecosystems, an alliance constellation whereby a digital platform enables direct interactions between two or more distinct sides (e.g. customer and supplier) and each side is affliated with the platform (e.g.
customers can be suppliers and vice versa). Multi-sided platforms are often seen as key
disruptors, and they come with new governance challenges. How to align technological, organizational and alliance governance? How to orchestrate value creation and value
appropriation? How to safeguard innovation and stimulate growth at the platform and
platform member levels of analysis?
Service alliance. Consistent with the development of servitization (Baines et al. 2009),
frms increasingly forge alliances to attain service provision benefts. Unlike production, services reach outcomes through co-production with customers, so alliances (or
ecosystems) based on services tend to be highly interactive, short-term focused and project based (see Chapter 20). In which conditions does such a service alliance support a
business strategy? How do organizational identity and customer identity interrelate, and
what is their impact on alliance performance? How is it possible to manage the alliance–
customer interaction within a service-based ecosystem? How can digitalization enhance
service delivery and quality in service alliances?

408
•
Strategic alliance management
Public–private–plural alliances. Public–private alliance arrangements are becoming
increasingly popular, as well as alliances with and between actors operating in the plural
sector. The plural sector refers to any association that is neither public nor private—
owned neither by the state nor by private investors (Mintzberg 2015)—and pertains
to, for example, non-governmental organizations, cooperatives and foundations. Alliances between public, private and plural actors are forged to deal with social challenges
such as (cyber)security, sustainability, corporate social responsibility, housing and climate
and environmental changes (see Chapter 26). Although we detailed cross-sector alliance
arrangements (see Chapter 15), future research may explore several questions, including
the following: how may public and plural organizations use bilateral and multi-lateral
alliances to attain their objectives? How and under what conditions can public–private–
plural alliances be used to resolve societal issues? How can such alliances be effectively
governed, and how can partner misfts (e.g. different values and institutional logics) be
resolved?

Academics should explore these research themes and develop and validate rigorous theories
(see Box 27.1), which then can inform alliance decision making. Studies also need to build on
prior research to develop a conceptually sound and empirically validated body of knowledge
(Castañer and Oliveira 2020). The accumulation of such knowledge will allow for verifcation, falsifcation and replication, which can help build a theoretically consistent, integrated
and logical structure of ideas.These theoretical advances may beneft managers by enhancing
their ability to deal with their strategic alliances—which means in turn that research output
must be practically applicable, incorporate explanations and guidelines for managers, provide
counter-intuitive insights and apply to practitioners at an appropriate time. With this book,
we hope to have made one such relevant contribution.

BOX 27.1 SUGGESTIONS FOR EMPIRICAL ALLIANCE RESEARCH
Research studies seeking to interpret and defne the complex and dynamic infuences
associated with strategic alliance management have proliferated in recent years. Many
of these studies have been characterized by the adoption of a positivistic perspective in
an attempt to quantify identifed behaviours in this feld. For example, alliance studies
used survey, secondary sources and experiment-based (to a lesser extent) methods and
techniques to generate quantitative data—data used to test hypotheses. The remainder
of the alliance studies have generally pursued a largely exploratory, often case study–
based approach, which provides more detail and depth to the existing body of knowledge. Though since its inception the alliance feld has become more rigorous and systematic in its use of methodology, as evident in the increasing use of more formalized
research processes and sophisticated techniques, there is still room for further improvement. A large part of the alliance literature uses cross-sectional design. Although the
results generated valuable and pragmatic knowledge about strategic alliance management to avoid issues with reversed causality (and other endogeneity problems) and
simultaneously reduce other measurement biases (e.g. common method bias), data collection preferably should occur at multiple points in time. Alliance research projects
Strategic alliance management
409
also often use subjective and perceptual data; however, collecting both subjective and
objective data would enhance the validity and reliability of research fndings. In addition, the majority of these studies use one-sided respondents to collect data about alliance phenomena. However, perceptions and experiences may difer between partner
representatives (e.g. trust, dependence and information asymmetry), hence the reliability and validity of future results would strongly beneft from two-sided data collection.
With regard to operational defnitions, to advance the feld and enable comparison of
empirical fndings, more consistency in measures is warranted. Consider for example
alliance performance. Despite eforts to develop coherent and multi-dimensional conceptual and operational defnitions, across alliance studies, diferent measurements are
employed. Emerging topics may warrant new methods and techniques. Understanding
the role of language in alliance negotiations may require more interpretative and possibly action-based research approaches. In addition, multi-level studies demand large
data sets and new, sophisticated techniques, whereas understanding alliance dynamics
demands longitudinal case-based approaches. Finally, the primary focus in the alliance
feld appears to be on innovative and original studies. However, more attention should
be given to replication, specifcally replication of prior fndings while accounting for
the idiosyncrasies associated with alliance development stages, alliance contextual factors and alliance competences.
Sources: Gomes et al. (2016); He et al. (2020).

APPENDIX
In this appendix we present a strategic alliance management checklist. The objective of this
checklist is to guide alliance professionals in their decision making. Building on the alliance
development framework steps presented in this book, we provide for each step the main decision, core activities and example questions.
TABLE A.1 Managerial checklist
Focus
Main decision and core activities
Questions (examples)
Alliance development framework
Alliance strategy
formulation
• Is alliance the most suitable
governance mode for realizing your
organization goals?
• Formulate business strategy.
• Develop a governance mode
selection framework.
• Retrieve internal and external
information.
• Assess alternative governance mode.
• Formulate alliance strategy.

• To what extent is it clear what
(strategic) objectives are pursued by
the organization?
• Is it clear what resources and
activities are required to attain these
objectives and to what extent the
organization lacks these resources
and/or activities?
• Are all motives clear and assessed,
in support of a decision to opt for
a strategic alliance (over internal
growth, merger and market
transaction)?
• Has a risk assessment been
conducted to explicate the
implications of a strategic alliance,
both internally and externally?
• Is the organization able to forge
and manage a strategic alliance?
• Are suffcient resources allocated
(time, staff, assets and support) to
successfully establish a strategic
alliance?
• Has a business case been developed?

Appendix
411
TABLE A.1 (Continued)
Focus
Main decision and core activities
Questions (examples)
Alliance partner
selection
• Which partner or group of partners
is most suitable for realizing
the alliance objectives of your
organization?
• Develop a partner profle.
• Make a long and short list of
potential partners.
• Develop partner ft framework.
• Conduct partner ft analysis.
• Conduct risk assessment.

• Are all possible partners considered,
familiar and unfamiliar?
• Are all partner selection criteria
clear and assessed, in support of
a decision to opt for a specifc
alliance partner?
• Does each partner contribute
equitably and uniquely to the
alliance, and combined do the
contributions provide suffcient
value-creation potential?
• Is it clear where areas for partner ft
and misft exist and what measures are
required for a smooth alliance launch?
• Has a risk assessment been conducted
to explicate the positive and negative
consequences of collaborating with
the preferred partner?

Alliance
negotiation
• How to create the alliance
conditions supporting the
execution of alliance in order to
realize win–win processes and
outcomes for all partners?
• Prepare the negotiation: e.g.
assemble alliance negotiation team
and set the agenda and strategy.
• Negotiate: refers to sharing
information, assess compatibility
and chemistry, balancing interests
and considering trade offs.
• Post-negotiation: refers to establish
relevant documentation and decide
to proceed.

• If applicable, has a non-disclosure
agreement been signed?
• Does the negotiation outcome
refect conditions that enable the
partners to attain individual and
collective objectives?
• Does the negotiation outcome refect
conditions that stimulate the partners
to actively collaborate and participate,
both short- and long-term?
• To what extent does the
negotiation process promote a
post-formation process exhibiting
trust building, mutual learning and
adaptability?
• Are all agreements formalized in a
letter of intent and/or alliance contract?

Alliance design
• Which alliance structure supports
your organization and your partners
the best for realizing the alliance
goals?
• Negotiate and document.
• Design organization and
governance form.
• Formulate contractual provisions.
• Develop management control.
• Assess effcacy alliance design.

• Are the alliance ambition,
individual objectives and joint
objectives explicated and formalized
in an alliance contract?
• Has the alliance organization been
set with regard to hierarchical
structure and operational activities?
• Are key staff identifed, and has it
been formalized with functions and
roles they fulfl?
• Does the legal arrangement ft with
the objective, the organization of
activities and the potential risks?
(Continued)
412
Appendix
TABLE A.1 (Continued)
Focus
Main decision and core activities
Questions (examples)
• Are all agreements formalized in
contractual clauses (e.g. termination,
exclusivity), and are appropriate
management control mechanisms in
place?
• If applicable, has a code of
conduct been explicated and
communicated?
• Is it clear to all partners how
conficts are resolved (if they
emerge), how unforeseen
circumstances are dealt with
(i.e. contingency clauses), how
progress is monitored, who has
decision-making authority and how
stakeholders are informed?

Alliance launch
• How to execute the alliance as to
effectuate a smooth transition from
alliance negotiation and design to
alliance management?
• Prepare alliance launch.
• Develop alliance launch strategy.
• Execute alliance launch strategy.
• Transition to alliance management
team.
• Evaluate and document learnings.

• To what extent is the (joint)
alliance launch team assembled? Are
members involved in negotiations,
and is the team ready to execute
the alliance?
• Has executive support from both
partners been obtained?
• Are functional and operational
plans prepared, launch activities
determined and milestones set?
• Has a communication plan to
inform internal and external
stakeholders been developed?
• Has a kick-off meeting been
organized?
• Has the transition from launch team
to management team been organized?
• Has the alliance launch been
evaluated and documented, as input
for future alliances?

Alliance
management
• How to manage the day-to-day
activities needed to realize alliance
goals and how to develop the
alliance?
• Manage day-to-day activities.
• Monitor the alliance.
• Decide on corrective measure(s).
• Intervene and communicate.

• To what extent does alliance
management promote a climate of
trust, safety and transparency?
• Are learning initiatives supported
and monitored?
• Are conficts quickly resolved
before they escalate?
• Are internal and external
developments monitored and assessed
on their impact on the alliances?
• Are interventions, adaptations and
relationship repair initiatives executed
before the relationship derails?

Appendix
413
Focus
Main decision and core activities
Questions (examples)
Alliance
evaluation
• How to evaluate the performance
of the alliance?
• Design a performance metric
system.
• Implement the performance metric
system.
• Interpret metric outcomes.
• Assess performance metric system.

• Are the common and individual
alliance objectives explicated?
• Have you determined, for each
objective, (1) input, (2) process and
(3) outcome metrics?
• Are procedures (who and when)
about data collection, data analysis
and reporting clear?
• Has it been determined at which
time intervals alliance evaluation is
conducted?
• Are adaptations and interventions
substantiated and in line with the
alliance strategy?
• Is the performance metric system
regularly updated, and is learning
applied to other alliances?

Alliance
termination
• Decide when and how to terminate
the alliance.
• Assess and initiate.
• Initiate dyadic communication.
• Disengage.
• Manage aftermath.

• Are alliance termination clauses
explicated in the alliance contract?
• Has the decision to withdraw from
the alliance been scrutinized, and is
it clear what the repercussions are
for the organization?
• Is it clear how and when the
alliance will be dismantled?
• Has a communication plan been
developed to inform internal and
external stakeholders?
• Are suffcient precautions being
taken to recoup resources and
prevent reputational damage?
• Are the best and worst alliance
practices documented?

• Is it clear how and what alliance
context may create unique
decision-making situations and
affect the choices associated with
steps 1–8?

• To what extent and how do
alliance objectives (e.g. learning,
supplier, co-branding) affect
alliance development decisions?
• To what extent and how do
alliance partners (e.g. international,
asymmetrical, cross-sector and
coopetition) affect alliance
development decisions?
• To what extent and how do
alliance constellations (e.g. multipartner, portfolio, network and
business ecosystem) affect alliance
development decisions?

Alliance attributes
Alliance
objectives
Alliance
partners
Alliance
constellations
(Continued)
414
Appendix
TABLE A.1 (Continued)
Focus
Main decision and core activities
Questions (examples)
• How to build, organize and deploy
strategic alliance management
practices?

• To what extent and how does a
frm employ competent alliance
professionals, offer educational
alliance programmes and assign
the best people to its alliance
relationships?
• To what extent and how does
a frm understand and manage
alliance teams, as a stand-alone team
or as part of a multi-team system?
• To what extent and how does a
frm capture, codify, communicate
and coach alliance worst and best
practices (e.g. alliance function, tool
development and training)?

• How to create an alliance mindset
enabling professionals to deal with
the complexities of alliance systems
and emerging forms of alliance
constellations?

• To what extent are alliance
professional equipped to identify
and resolve tensions inherently tied
to alliance management?
• To what extent does a frm
understand the complexity and
co-evolutionary (adaptative) nature
of alliance systems?
• To what extent is a frm aware of
emerging alliance practices and
thus able to forge and manage
technological and societal alliance
arrangements?

Alliance competence
Alliance
professionals
Alliance teams
Alliance
capabilities
Alliance challenge
Alliance mindset
Alliance system
Contemporary
alliances
REFERENCES
Aarikka-Stenroos, L. and Ritala, P. (2017) ‘Network management in the era of ecosystems: Systematic
review and management framework’. Industrial Marketing Management, 67: 23–36.
Accenture (2016) ‘Financial technology has been on the rise for fve years’. Available online at http://
fntechinnovationlabnyc.com/media/830595/FinTech-New-York-Partnerships-Platforms-OpenInnovation.pdf (accessed 14 December 2016).
Accenture (2022) ‘Supply chain disruption: Repurposed supply chains of the future must have resilience
and responsibility at their heart’.Available online at www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/consulting/
coronavirus-supply-chain-disruption (accessed 25 June 2020).
Achrol, R. S. (1997) ‘Changes in the theory of interorganizational relations in marketing:Toward a network paradigm’. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25: 56–71.
Adner, R. (2012) ‘Amazon vs Apple: Competing ecosystem strategies’. Available online at http://hbr.
org/2012/03/amazon-vs-apple-competing-ecos/ (accessed 26 July 2016).
Adner, R. (2017) ‘Ecosystem as structure: An actionable construct for strategy’. Journal of Management,
43(1): 39–58.
Adner, R. and Kapoor, R. (2010) ‘Value creation in innovation ecosystems: How the structure of technological interdependence affects frm performance in new technology generations’. Strategic Management Journal, 31(3): 306–333.
Adobor, H. (2004) ‘High performance management of shared-managed joint venture teams: Contextual
and socio-dynamic factors’. Team Performance Management, 10: 65–76.
Agarwal, R., Croson, R. and Mahoney, J.T. (2010) ‘The role of incentives and communication in strategic alliances:An experimental investigation’. Strategic Management Journal, 31: 413–437.
Agostini, L. and Nosella, A. (2019) ‘Inter-organizational relationships involving SMEs: A bibliographic
investigation into the state of the art’. Long Range Planning, 52(1): 1–31.
Agudelo, M. A. L., Jóhannsdóttir, L. and Davídsdóttir, B. (2019) ‘A literature review of the history and
evolution of corporate social responsibility’. International Journal of Corporate Social Responsibility, 4(1):
1–23.
Ahuja, G. (2000) ‘Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation:A longitudinal study’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45: 425–455.
Albanese, R. and Van Fleet, D. D. (1985) ‘The free-riding tendency in organizations’. Scandinavian Journal
of Management Studies, 2: 121–135.
Albers, S., Wohlgezogen, F. and Zajac, E. J. (2016) ‘Strategic alliance structures: An organization design
perspective’. Journal of Management, 42: 582–614.
Aldrich, H. E. and Pfeffer, J. (1976) ‘Environments of organization’. Annual Review of Sociology, 2: 79–105.
Algeanews (2011) ‘Solazyme and Bunge sign JDA partnership for production of renewable triglyceride
oils’.Available online at http://algaenews.com/?p=384 (accessed 2 August 2011).

416
References
Ali,T. and Larimo, J. (2016) ‘Managing opportunism in international joint ventures:The role of structural and social mechanisms’. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 32: 86–96.
Alliance for Open Media (2015) ‘Alliance for Open Media established to deliver next-generation Open
Media formats’. Available online at http://aomedia.org/press-releases/alliance-to-deliver-nextgeneration-open-media-formats/ (accessed 27 July 2016).
Alvarez, S. A. and Barney, J. B. (2001) ‘How entrepreneurial frms can beneft from alliances with large
partners’. Academy of Management Executive, 15: 139.
Amazon (2022a) ‘Amazon robotics supports Georgia tech startup incubator’. Available online at www.
amazon.science/academic-engagements/amazon-robotics-supports-atdc-georgia-tech-startupincubator (accessed 5 November 2022).
Amazon (2022b) ‘How Amazon is bringing the excitement of Disney’s ultimate fan expo to everyone’.
Available online at www.aboutamazon.com/news/retail/how-amazon-is-bringing-the-excitementof-disneys-ultimate-fan-expo-to-everyone (accessed 8 November 2022).
Anand, B. N. and Khanna,T. (2000) ‘Do frms learn to create value? The case of alliances’. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 295–315.
Anderson, E. (1990) ‘Two frms, one frontier: On assessing joint venture performance’. Sloan Management
Review, 31: 19–30.
Anderson, S.W., Christ, M., Dekker, H. C. and Sedatole, K. L. (2015) ‘Do extant management control
frameworks ft the alliance setting? A descriptive analysis’. Industrial Marketing Management, 46: 36–53.
Andriessa, R. (2022) ‘Maritime transport:The backbone of international trade activities’.Available online at
https://cwts.ugm.ac.id/en/2022/04/18/maritime-transport-the-backbone-of-international-tradeactivities/ (accessed 6 November 2022).
Ang, S. H., Benischke, M. H. and Doh, J. P. (2015) ‘The interactions of institutions on foreign market
entry mode’. Strategic Management Journal, 36: 1536–1553.
Ankrah, S. and Al-Tabbaa, O. (2015) ‘Universities-industry collaboration:A systematic review’. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 31: 387–408.
Apple (2022a) ‘Apple calls on global supply chain to decarbonize by 2030’. Available online at www.
apple.com/newsroom/2022/10/apple-calls-on-global-supply-chain-to-decarbonize-by-2030/
(accessed 8 November 2022).
Apple (2022b) ‘Apple music and Mercedes-Benz bring premium immersive Spatial Audio to drivers
worldwide’. Available online at www.apple.com/newsroom/2022/10/apple-music-and-mercedesbenz-bring-immersive-spatial-audio-to-drivers-worldwide/ (accessed 8 November 2022).
Ariño,A. (2003) ‘Measures of collaborative venture performance:An analysis of construct validity’. Journal of International Business Studies, 34: 66–79.
Ariño, A. and de la Torre, J. (1998) ‘Learning from failure:Towards an evolutionary model of collaborative ventures’. Organization Science, 9: 306–325.
Ariño,A., de la Torre, J. and Ring, P. S. (2001) ‘Relational quality: Managing trust in corporate alliances’.
California Management Review, 44: 109–131.
Ariño, A. and Reuer, J. J. (2004) ‘Designing and renegotiating strategic alliance contracts’. Academy of
Management Executive, 18: 37–48.
Ariño, A., Reuer, J. J., Mayer, K. J. and Jané, J. (2014) ‘Contracts, negotiation, and learning: An examination of termination provisions’. Journal of Management Studies, 51: 379–405.
Arora, A. and Ceccagnoli, M. (2006) ‘Patent protection, complementary assets, and frms’ incentives for
technology licensing’. Management Science, 52: 293–308.
Arranz, N., Arroyabe, M. and Fdez Arroyabe, J. C. (2016) ‘Alliance-building process as inhibiting factor
for SME international alliances’. British Journal of Management, 27: 497–515.
Arya, B. and Salk, J. E. (2006) ‘Cross-sector alliance learning and effectiveness of voluntary codes of
corporate social responsibility’. Business Ethics Quarterly, 16: 211–234.
ASAP (2016) ‘Alliance management professional development guide’.Available online at www.strategicalliances.org/?page=cert_overview (accessed 20 July 2016).
ASAP (2022) ‘Code of conduct for alliance professionals’. Available online at www.strategic-alliances.
org/code-of-conduct-for-alliance-professionals (accessed 25 June 2022).

References
417
AT&T (2021) ‘AT&T brings 5G connectivity to the GE research campus’. Available online at https://
about.att.com/story/2021/ge-research.html (accessed 17 October 2022).
Aulakh, P. S., Kotabe, M. and Sahay,A. (1996) ‘Trust and performance in cross-border marketing partnerships:A behavioral approach’. Journal of International Business Studies, 27: 1005–1032.
Austin, J. E. (2000) The collaboration challenge: How nonprofts and business succeed through strategic alliances.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bacharach, S. B. (1989) ‘Organizational theories—some criteria for evaluation’. Academy of Management
Review, 14: 496–515.
Baines,T. S., Lightfoot, H.W., Benedettini, J. M. and Kay, J. M. (2009) ‘The servitization of manufacturing: A review of literature and refection on future challenges’. Journal of Manufacturing Technology
Management, 20: 547–567.
Bakker, R. M. (2016) ‘Stepping in and stepping out: Strategic alliance partner reconfguration and the
unplanned termination of complex projects’. Strategic Management Journal, 37: 1919–1941.
Bakker, R. M. and Knoben, J. (2014) ‘Built to last or meant to end: Intertemporal choice in strategic
alliance portfolios’. Organization Science, 26: 256–276.
Bamel, N., Pereira,V., Bamel, U. and Cappiello, G. (2021) ‘Knowledge management within a strategic
alliances context: Past, present and future’. Journal of Knowledge Management, 25(7): 1782–1810.
Bamford, J. D., Bhargave, S. and Danie, P. (2022) Partnership makers shakers: Ankura’s 2022 scoreboard of
corporate partnering activity’.Washington, DC:Ankura Consulting Group.
Bamford, J. D. and Ernst, D. (2003) ‘Growth of alliance capabilities’. In Bamford, J. D., Gomes-Casseres,
B. and Robinson, M. S. (eds.), Mastering alliance strategy:A comprehensive guide to design, management, and
organization. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, pp. 321–333.
Bamford, J. D., Ernst, D. and Fubini, D. G. (2004) ‘Launching a world-class joint venture’. Harvard Business Review, 82: 90–100.
Bamford, J. D., Gomes-Casseres, B. and Robinson, M. S. (2003) Mastering alliance strategy:A comprehensive
guide to design, management, and organization. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bardsley, J. (2013) ‘Oxfam and Marks and Spencer’s schwopping partnership’. Available online at
http://sofi.org/case-study/oxfam-and-marks-and-spencers-schwopping-partnership (accessed 2
December 2016).
Barkema, H. G., Bell, J. H. J. and Pennings, J. M. (1996) ‘Foreign entry, cultural barriers, and learning’.
Strategic Management Journal, 17: 151–166.
Barney, J. B. (1991) ‘Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage’. Journal of Management, 17:
99–120.
Barney, J. B. and Hansen, M. H. (1994) ‘Trustworthiness as a source of competitive advantage’. Strategic
Management Journal, 15: 175–190.
Barringer, B. R. and Harrison, J. S. (2000) ‘Walking a tightrope: Creating value through interorganizational relationships’. Journal of Management, 26: 367–403.
Barroso-Méndez, M. J., Galera-Casqueta, C., Seitanidib, M. M. and Valero-Amaroa, V. (2016) ‘Crosssector social partnership success: A process perspective on the role of relational factors’. European
Management Journal, 34: 674–685.
Basken, P. (2022) ‘MIT ends Skoltech partnership over Ukraine war’. Available online at www.
timeshighereducation.com/news/mit-ends-skoltech-partnership-over-ukraine-war (accessed 23
September 2022).
Baum, J. A. C., Calabrese,T. and Silverman, B. S. (2000) ‘Don’t go it alone:Alliance network composition
and startups’ performance in Canadian biotechnology’. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 267–294.
Beamish, P. W. (1993) ‘Characteristics of joint ventures in the people’s Republic of China’. Journal of
International Marketing, 1: 29–48.
Beamish, P.W. and Lupton, N. C. (2016) ‘Cooperative strategies in international business and management: Refections on the past 50 years and future directions’. Journal of World Business, 51: 163–175.
Beckman, C. M., Schoonhoven, C. B., Rottner, R. M. and Kim, S.-J. (2014) ‘Relational pluralism in De
Novo organizations: Board of directors as bridges or barriers to diverse alliance portfolios?’ Academy
of Management Journal, 57(2): 460–483.

418
References
Bell, J., den Ouden, B. and Ziggers, G.W. (2006) ‘Dynamics of cooperation:At the brink of irrelevance’.
Journal of Management Studies, 43: 1607–1619.
Bell, J. and Lemmens, C. E.A.V. (2007) ‘Alliantievaardigheden als kerncompetentie: een verdiepende case
study’. Tijdschrift voor Management en Organisatie, 61: 129–138.
Bell, J., Singh, H. and Kale, P. (2010) ‘Making strategic alliances work: How Royal Philips tries to build
alliance capability’. In Tjemkes, B., van den Hout, T. and Schrijver, I. (eds.), Strategie in verhouding:
Netwerken, stakeholders, samenwerken. Den Haag: Lemma, pp. 165–174.
Beltagui,A., Rosli,A. and Candi, M. (2020) ‘Exaptation in a digital innovation ecosystem:The disruptive
impacts of 3D printing’. Research Policy, 49: 103833.
Bengtsson, M. and Kock, S. (2000) ‘Coopetition in business networks—to cooperate and compete
simultaneously’. Industrial Marketing Management, 29: 411–426.
Bengtsson, M. and Raza-Ullah, T. (2016) ‘A systematic review of research on coopetition: Toward a
multilevel understanding’. Industrial Marketing Management, 57: 23–39.
Bennis,W. and Nanus, B. (1985) Leaders:The strategies for taking charge. New York: Harper & Row.
Berard, C. and Perez, M. (2014) ‘Alliance dynamics through real options:The case of an alliance between
competing pharmaceutical companies’. European Management Journal, 32(2): 337–349.
Berthon, P., Pitt, L. F., Ewing, M.T. and Bakkeland, G. (2003) ‘Norms and power in marketing relationships:Alternative theories and empirical evidence’. Journal of Business Research, 56: 699–709.
BICO (2022) ‘BICO has reached a benefcial and sustainable solution with Organovo’.Available online
at https://news.cision.com/bico-group/r/bico-has-reached-a-benefcial-and-sustainable-solutionwith-organovo,c3512360 (accessed 5 November 2022).
Bjørkeng, K., Clegg, S. and Pitsis,T. (2009) ‘Becoming (a) practice’. Management Learning, 40(2): 145–159.
Blankenburg Holm, D., Eriksson, K. and Johanson, J. (1999) ‘Creating value through mutual commitment to business network relationships’. Strategic Management Journal, 20: 467–486.
Blass, E. (2016) ‘Microsoft, Nokia and the burning platform: A fnal look at the failed Windows phone
alliance’.Available online at http://venturebeat.com/2016/02/05/microsoft-nokia-and-the-burningplatform-a-fnal-look-at-the-failed-windows-phone-alliance/ (accessed 2 December 2016).
Blau, P. M. (1964) Exchange and power in social life. New York:Wiley.
Blodgett, L. L. (1991a) ‘Partner contributions as predictors of equity share in international joint ventures’. Journal of International Business Studies, 22: 63–78.
Blodgett, L. L. (1991b) ‘Toward a resource-based theory of bargaining power in international joint ventures’. Journal of Global Marketing, 5: 35–54.
Blodgett, L. L. (1992) ‘Factors in the instability of international joint ventures—an event history analysis’.
Strategic Management Journal, 13: 475–481.
Bloomberg (2017) ‘AIG, IBM, standard chartered deliver frst multinational insurance policy powered
by blockchain’. Available online at www.bloomberg.com/press-releases/2017-06-15/aig-ibmstandard-chartered-deliver-frst-multinational-insurance-policy-powered-by-blockchain (accessed
25 September 2020).
Boersma, M. F., Buckley, P. J. and Ghauri, P. N. (2003) ‘Trust in international joint venture relationships’.
Journal of Business Research, 56: 1031–1042.
Bonaccorsi, A. and Piccaluga, A. (2000) ‘A theoretical framework for the evaluation of university—
industry relationships’. R&D Management, 24: 229–247.
Bouncken, R. B. and Fredrich,V. (2016) ‘Business model innovation in alliances: Successful confgurations’. Journal of Business Research, 69: 3584–3590.
Boyer O’Leary, M., Mortensen, M. and Williams Woolley, A. M. (2012) ‘Multiple team membership:
A theoretical model of its effects on productivity and learning for individuals and teams’. Academy of
Management Review, 36: 461–478.
Bradford, K. D., Stringfellow, A. and Weitz, B. A. (2004) ‘Managing confict to improve the effectiveness
of retail networks’. Journal of Retailing, 80: 181–195.
Brattström,A. and Faems, D. (2020) ‘Inter-organizational relationships as political battlefelds: How fragmentation within organizations shapes relational dynamics between organizations’. Academy of Management Journal, 63(5): 1591–1620.

References
419
Brouthers, K. D. and Bamossy, G. J. (2006) ‘Post-formation processes in eastern and western European
joint ventures’. Journal of Management Studies, 43: 203–229.
Brown, B. and Anthony, S. (2011) ‘How P&G tripled its innovation success rate’. Harvard Business Review:
66–72.
Brown,T. J. and Dacin, P.A. (1997) ‘The company and the product: Corporate associations and consumer
product responses’. Journal of Marketing, 61: 68–84.
Browning, L. D., Beyer, J. M. and Shetler, J. C. (1995) ‘Building cooperation in a competitive industry:
SEMATECH and the semiconductor industry’. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 113–151.
Bruner, R. F., Eaker, M. R., Freeman, R. E., Spekman, R. E., Olmsted Teisberg, E. and Venkataraman, S.
(2003) The portable MBA. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Büchel, B. (2000) ‘Framework of joint venture development: Theory-building through qualitative
research’. Journal of Management Studies, 37: 636–661.
Büchel, B. (2002) ‘Joint venture development: Driving forces towards equilibrium’. Journal of World Business, 37: 199–207.
Büchel, B. and Thuy, L. X. (2001) ‘Measures of joint venture performance from multiple perspectives:An
evaluation by local and foreign managers in Vietnam’. Asia Pacifc Journal of Management, 18: 101–111.
Burt, R. S. (1982) Toward a structural theory of action: Network models of social structure, perception, and action.
New York:Academic Press.
Business Times (2022) ‘DBS launch 5 partnerships enhance MSEs digital supply chain capabilities’.
Available online at www.businesstimes.com.sg/sme/dbs-to-launch-5-partnerships-to-enhancedigital-fnancing-capabilities-for-smes-across-asia (accessed 5 November 2022).
Businessweek Online (2002) ‘Why P&G’s smile is so bright: With the fast-growing SpinBrush, the
company bent its own rules—and won’.Available online at http://karlulrich.pbworks.com/f/P&Gspinbrush.pdf (accessed 2 August 2011).
Business Wire (2011a) ‘Solazyme and Dow form an alliance for the development of micro algaederived oils for use in bio-based dielectric insulating fuids’. Available online at www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20110309005503/en/Solazyme-Dow-Form-Alliance-Development-MicroAlgae-Derived (accessed 2 August 2011).
Business Wire (2011b) ‘GE energy fnancial services expands gas-fred lending portfolio with
$73 million for LS power merchant plant’. Available online at www.businesswire.com/news/
home/20110613006238/en/GE-Energy-Financial-Services-Expands-Gas-Fired-Lending (accessed
2 August 2011).
Caniëls, M. C. J. and Gelderman, C. J. (2010) ‘The safeguarding effect of governance mechanisms in
inter-frm exchange: The decisive role of mutual opportunism’. British Journal of Management, 21:
239–254.
Canter,A. and Twombly, J. (2016) ‘Project vs alliance management’.Available online at www.iienet2.org/
Details.aspx?id=21778 (accessed 10 July 2016).
Capaldo,A. (2007) ‘Network structure and innovation:The leveraging of a dual network as a distinctive
relational capability’. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 585–608.
Capaldo,A. (2014) ‘Network governance:A cross-level study of social mechanisms, knowledge benefts,
and strategic outcomes in joint-design alliances’. Industrial Marketing Management, 43: 685–703.
Capgemini (2007) ‘Smart energy alliance: Planning next generation distribution with the distribution roadmap’.Available online at www.capgemini.com/insights-and-resources/by-publication/distribution_
roadmap/ (accessed 2 August 2011).
Castañer, X. and Oliveira, N. (2020) ‘Collaboration, coordination, and cooperation among organizations:
Establishing the distinctive meanings of these terms through a systematic literature review’. Journal
of Management, 46: 965–1001.
Castiglioni, M. and Galán González, J. L. (2020) ‘Alliance portfolio classifcation.Which portfolio do you
have?’. Baltic Journal of Management, 15(5): 757–774.
Castro, I. and Roldan, J. L. (2015) ‘Alliance portfolio management: Dimensions and performance’. European Management Review, 12: 63–81.
Castro, I., Roldán, J. and Acedo, F. J. (2015) ‘The dimensions of alliance portfolio confguration:A mediation model’. Journal of Management & Organization, 21: 176–202.

420
References
Chai, K. H. (2003) ‘Bridging islands of knowledge: A framework of knowledge sharing mechanisms’.
International Journal of Technology Management, 25: 703–727.
Chang,W. L. (2009) ‘Using multi-criteria decision aid to rank and select co-branding partners: From a
brand personality perspective’. Kybernetes, 38: 954–969.
Chang, W. L. and Chang, K. C. (2008) ‘A taxonomy model for a strategic co-branding position’. In
Hawamdeh, S., Stauss, K. and Barachini, F. (eds.), Knowledge management: Competencies and professionalism (Series on Innovation and Knowledge Management Vol. 7). Singapore:World Scientifc Publishing, pp. 355–366.
Chen, C. J. (2004) ‘The effects of knowledge attribute, alliance characteristics, and absorptive capacity on
knowledge transfer performance’. R&D Management, 34: 311–321.
Chen, D., Park, S. H. and Newburry,W. (2009) ‘Parent contribution and organizational control in international joint ventures’. Strategic Management Journal, 30: 1133–1156.
Chesbrough, H.W. (2003) Open innovation:The new imperative for creating and profting from technology. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Chi, T. (1994) ‘Trading in strategic resources—necessary conditions, transaction cost problems, and
choice of exchange structure’. Strategic Management Journal, 15: 271–290.
Chiambaretto, P. (2015) ‘Resource dependence and power-balancing operations in alliances:The role of
market redefnition strategies’. Management, 18: 205–233.
Chiambaretto, P. and Fernandez,A. S. (2016) ‘The evolution of coopetitive and collaborative alliances in
an alliance portfolio:The Air France case’. Industrial Marketing Management, 57: 75–85.
Child, J. (2002) ‘A confgurational analysis of international joint ventures’. Organization Studies, 23:
781–815.
Child, J. and Faulkner, D. (1998) Strategies of cooperation: Managing alliances, networks, and joint ventures.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Child, J. and Yan,Y. N. (1999) ‘Investment and control in international joint ventures:The case of China’.
Journal of World Business, 34: 3–15.
Choi, J. and Contractor, F. J. (2016) ‘Choosing an appropriate alliance governance mode: The role of
institutional, cultural and geographical distance in international research & development (R&D)
collaborations’. Journal of International Business Studies, 47: 210–232.
Choi, J. and Yeniyurt, S. (2015) ‘Contingency distance factors and international research and development (R&D), marketing, and manufacturing alliance formations’. International Business Review, 24:
1061–1071.
Christensen, C. M., McDonald, R., Altman, E. J. and Palmer, J. E. (2018) ‘Disruptive innovation:
An intellectual history and directions for future research’. Journal of Management Studies, 55:
1043–1078.
Christoffersen, J. (2013) ‘A review of antecedents of international strategic alliance performance: Synthesized evidence and new directions for core constructs’. International Journal of Management Reviews,
15: 66–85.
Christoffersen, J., Plenborg,T. and Robson, M. J. (2014) ‘Measures of strategic alliance performance, classifed and assessed’. International Business Review, 23: 479–489.
Cisco (2019) ‘CHILL leads the way to Industry 4.0’. Available online at https://newsroom.cisco.
com/c/r/newsroom/en/us/a/y2019/m09/chill-leads-the-way-to-industry-4–0.html (accessed 8
November 2022).
Cisco (2020) ‘Cisco merges CHILL accelerator into global innovation center program’.Available online at
www.bizjournals.com/sanjose/news/2020/03/23/cisco-merges-chill-accelerator-into-global.html
(accessed 8 November 2022).
Climate (2022) ‘Climate change: Atmospheric carbon dioxide’. Available online at www.climate.gov/
news-features/understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide#:~:text=August%20
14%2C%202020-,Highlights,2020%3A%20412.5%20parts%20per%20million (accessed 7 November 2022).
Clubofrome (2022) ‘The limits to growth’. Available online at www.clubofrome.org/publication/thelimits-to-growth/ (accessed 7 November 2022).
CNNMoney (2004) ‘Pixar dumps Disney’. Available online at http://money.cnn.com/2004/01/29/
news/companies/pixar_disney/ (accessed 2 August 2011).

References
421
Cobben, D. Y. P., Ooms, W. M., Roijakkers, A. H. W. M. and Radziwon, A. (2022) ‘Ecosystem types:
A systematic review on boundaries and goals’. Journal of Business Research, 142: 138–164.
Coca-Cola (2019) ‘Coca-Cola European partners invests in delivery start-ups’. Available online at
www.foodbev.com/news/coca-cola-european-partners-invests-in-delivery-start-ups (accessed 5
November 2022).
Coff, R.W. (1999) ‘When competitive advantage doesn’t lead to performance:The resource-based view
and stakeholder bargaining power’. Organization Science, 10: 119–133.
Cohen,W. M. and Levinthal, D. (1990) ‘Absorptive capacity:A new perspective on learning and innovation’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35: 128–152.
Coleman, J. S. (1990) Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Connelly, B. L.,Trevis Certo, S., Ireland, R. D. and Reutzel, C. R. (2011) ‘Signaling theory:A review and
assessment’. Journal of Management, 37: 39–67.
Contractor, F. J. (2001) ‘Intangible assets and principles for their valuation’. In Contractor, F. J. (ed.), Valuation of intangible assets in global operations. London: Quorum Books, pp. 3–24.
Contractor, F. J. (2005) ‘Alliance structure and process:Will the two research streams ever meet in alliance
research?’. European Management Review, 2: 123–129.
Contractor, F. J. and Ra, W. (2000) ‘Negotiating alliance contracts—strategy and behavioral effects of
alternative compensation arrangements’. International Business Review, 9: 271–299.
Contractor, F. J. and Reuer, J. (2014) ‘Structuring and governing alliances: New directions for research’.
Global Strategy Journal, 4: 241–256.
Contractor, F. J. and Woodley, J.A. (2015) ‘How the alliance pie is split:Value appropriation by each partner in cross-border technology transfer alliances’. Journal of World Business, 50: 535–547.
Cooper, R. (2012) ‘James Bond just sold out: Daniel Craig swaps Vodka Martini for a bottle of Heineken
to star in a controversial new 007 ad’. Available online at www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article2206593/James-Bond-swaps-Vodka-Martini-pint-Heineken-controversial-product-placementdeal-new-flm.html (accessed 2 December 2016).
Corbion (2017) ‘Innovative microalgae specialist TerraVia acquired by Corbion’. Available online at
www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2017/09/29/1134696/0/en/Innovative-microalgaespecialist-TerraVia-acquired-by-Corbion.html (accessed 8 November 2022).
Corbo, L., Kraus, S.,Vlacic, B., Dabic, M., Caputo,A. and Pellegrini, M. (2022) ‘Coopetition and innovation:A review and research agenda’. Technovation, 102624.
Cravens, K., Piercy, N. and Cravens, D. (2000) ‘Assessing the performance of strategic alliances: Matching
metrics to strategies’. European Management Journal, 18: 529–541.
Crunchbase (2022) ‘Crunchbase, Hubspot, fnancials’.Available online at www.crunchbase.com/organization/hubspot/company_fnancials (accessed 17 October 2022).
Cryptoslate (2022) ‘DBS bank enters the metaverse with Sandbox-partnership’. Available online at
https://cryptoslate.com/singapores-dbs-bank-enters-the-metaverse-with-sandbox-partnership
(accessed 5 November 2022).
CSIS News (2011) ‘CARE and Cargill:An innovative NGO—private sector partnership to fght global
poverty’. Available online at http://csis.org/event/care-and-cargill-innovative-ngo-private-sectorpartnership-fght-global-poverty (accessed 2 August 2011).
Cui, A. S. (2013) ‘Portfolio dynamics and alliance termination:The contingent role of resource dissimilarity’. Journal of Marketing, 77: 15–32.
Cullen, J. B., Johnson, J. L. and Sakano,T. (1995) ‘Japanese and local partner commitment to IJVs: Psychological consequences of outcomes and investments in the IJV relationship’. Journal of International
Business Studies, 26: 91–115.
Cummings, J. L. and Teng, B.-S. (2003) ‘Transferring R&D knowledge:The key factors affecting knowledge transfer success’. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 20: 39–68.
Dacin, M.T., Hitt, M. A. and Levitas, E. (1997) ‘Selecting partners for successful international alliances:
Examination of US and Korean frms’. Journal of World Business, 32: 3–16.
Dalenogare, L., Benitez, G., Ayala, N. and Frank, A. (2018) ‘The expected contribution of industry 4.0
technologies for industrial performance’. International Journal of Production Economics, 204: 383–394.

422
References
Dan, S. M. and Zondag, M. M. (2016) ‘Drivers of alliance terminations:An empirical examination of the
bio-pharmaceutical industry’. Industrial Marketing Management, 54: 107–115.
Das,T. K. and Kumar, R. (2010) ‘Inter-partner negotiations in the alliance development’. In Das,T. K.
(ed.), Researching strategic alliances: Emerging perspectives. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing,
pp. 207–258.
Das, T. K. and Rahman, N. (2001) ‘Partner misbehaviour in strategic alliances: Guidelines for effective
deterrence’. Journal of General Management, 27: 43–70.
Das, T. K. and Teng, B.-S. (2000a) ‘Instabilities of strategic alliances: An internal tensions perspective’.
Organization Science, 11: 77–101.
Das,T. K. and Teng, B.-S. (2000b) ‘A resource-based theory of strategic alliances’. Journal of Management,
26: 31–61.
Das,T. K. and Teng, B.-S. (2001) ‘Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances:An integrated framework’.
Organization Studies, 22: 251–283.
Das,T. K. and Teng, B.-S. (2002) ‘The dynamics of alliance conditions in the alliance development process’. Journal of Management Studies, 39: 725–746.
Das,T. K. and Teng, B.-S. (2003) ‘Partner analysis and alliance performance’. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 19: 279–308.
Dasi-Rodriguez, S. and Pardo-del-Val, M. (2015) ‘Seeking partners in international alliances:The infuence of cultural factors’. Journal of Business Research, 68: 1522–1526.
D’Aunno,T. A. and Zuckerman, H. S. (1987) ‘A life cycle model of organizational federations:The case
of hospitals’. Academy of Management Review, 12: 534–545.
David, R. J. and Han, S. K. (2004) ‘A systematic assessment of the empirical support for transaction cost
economics’. Strategic Management Journal, 25: 39–58.
Davis, J. P. (2016) ‘The group dynamics of interorganizational relationships: Collaborating with multiple
partners in innovation ecosystems’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 61(4): 621–661.
DBS (2022a) ‘DBS our promise to you’.Available online at www.dbs.com/about-us/who-we-are/ourpromise-to-you (accessed 5 November 2022).
DBS (2022b) ‘DBS our heritage’.Available online at www.dbs.com/about-us/who-we-are/our-heritage
(accessed 5 November 2022).
Dedehayir, O., Makinen, S. J. and Ortt, R. (2016) ‘Roles during innovation ecosystem genesis: A literature review’. Technological Forecasting and Social Change 136: 18–29.
Deeds, D. L. and Hill, C.W. L. (1998) ‘An examination of opportunistic action within research alliances:
Evidence from the biotechnology industry’. Journal of Business Venturing, 14: 141–163.
Deeds, D. L. and Hill, W. L. (1996) ‘Strategic alliances and the rate of new product development: An
empirical study of entrepreneurial biotechnology frms’. Journal of Business Venturing, 11: 41–55.
de Man,A. P. (2005) ‘Alliance capability:A comparison of the strength of European and American companies’. European Management Journal, 23: 315–323.
de Man, A. P. (2013) Alliances: An executive guide to designing successful strategic partnerships. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley and Sons.
de Man, A. P. and Luvison, D. (2014) ‘Sense-making’s role in creating alliance supportive organizational
cultures’. Management Decision, 52: 259–277.
de Rond, M. and Bouchikhi, H. (2004) ‘On the dialectics of strategic alliances’. Organization Science, 15:
56–69.
de Wit, B. and Meyer, R. (2004) Strategy process, content, context: An international perspective (3rd edition).
London: Thomson Learning.
de Wulf, K. and Odekerken-Schroder, G. (2001) ‘A critical review of theories underlying relationship
marketing in the context of explaining consumer relationships’. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 31: 73–101.
Dekker, H. C. (2004) ‘Control of inter-organizational relationships: Evidence on appropriation concerns
and coordination requirements’. Accounting Organizations and Society, 29: 27–49.
Dentoni, D., Pinkse, J. and Lubberink, R. (2021) ‘Linking sustainable business models to socio-ecological
resilience through cross-sector partnerships: A complex adaptive systems view’. Business & Society,
60(5): 1216–1252.

References
423
Deutsch, C. H. (2007) ‘New York Times, the venturesome giant’. New York Times. Available online at
www.nytimes.com/2007/10/05/business/worldbusiness/05venture.html (accessed 2 August 2011).
DiMaggio, P. J. and Powell,W.W. (1983) ‘The iron cage revisited—institutional isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational felds’. American Sociological Review, 48: 147–160.
Ding, D. Z. (1997) ‘Control, confict, and performance:A study of US—Chinese joint ventures’. Journal
of International Marketing, 5: 31–45.
Ditek Cluster (2017) ‘Artifcial intelligence technology cluster’. Available online at https://endr.eu/
organisation/18/artifcial-intelligence-technology-cluster (accessed 30 October 2022).
Dittrich, K., Duysters, G. and de Man,A. P. (2007) ‘Strategic repositioning by means of alliance networks:
The case of IBM’. Research Policy, 36: 1496–1511.
Dorn, S., Schweiger, B. and Albers, S. (2016) ‘Levels, phases and themes of coopetition: A systematic
literature review and research agenda’. European Management Journal, 34: 484–500.
Douma, M. U., Bilderbeek, J., Idenburg, P. J. and Looise, J. K. (2000) ‘Strategic alliances—managing the
dynamics of ft’. Long Range Planning, 33: 579–598.
Doz,Y. L. (1996) ‘The evolution of cooperation in strategic alliances: Initial conditions or learning processes?’ Strategic Management Journal, 17: 55–83.
Doz,Y. L. and Hamel, G. (1998) Alliance advantage:The art of creating value through partnering. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
Drach-Zahavy, A. (2011) ‘Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners: The role of team diversity,
boundedness, and extrateam links’. European Journal of Work & Organizational Psychology, 20: 89–118.
Drupal (2016) ‘About’.Available online at www.drupal.org/about (accessed 20 July 2016).
Drupal (2022) ‘On its 20th birthday, Drupal poised to capture the next generation of the digital
experience market’. Available online at www.prweb.com/releases/on_its_20th_birthday_drupal_
poised_to_capture_the_next_generation_of_the_digital_experience_market/prweb17664393.htm
(accessed 11 November 2022).
DSM (2016) ‘Partnerships: Pharma & bulk chemicals’. Available online at www.dsm.com/corporate/
about/business-entities/partnerships.html (accessed 2 December 2016).
DSM (2020) ‘DSM and Padang & Co. announce strategic partnership with FoodInnovate to advance
food innovation in Singapore’. Available online at www.dsm.com/food-beverage/en_US/insights/
insights/innovation/2020-10-19-dsm-and-padang-co-announce-strategic-partnership-withfoodinnovate-to-advance-food-innovation-in-singapore (accessed 18 October 2022).
DSM (2022) ‘DSM and the World Food Programme partner to improve nutrition around the world’.
Available online at www.dsm.com/corporate/news/news-archive/2022/dsm-and-wfp-partner-toimprove-nutrition-around-the-world.html (accessed 17 October 2022).
Duysters, G. and de Man,A. P. (2003) ‘Transitory alliances:An instrument for surviving turbulent industries?’. R&D Management, 33: 49–58.
Duysters, G., de Man, A. P., Luvison, D. and Krijnen, A. (2012) The state of alliance management: Past, present, future. Eindhoven:Association of Strategic Alliance Professionals.
Duysters, G., Kok, G. and Vaandrager, M. (1999) ‘Crafting successful strategic technology partnerships’.
R&D Management, 29: 343–351.
Dwyer, F. R., Schurr, P. H. and Oh, S. (1987) ‘Developing buyer—seller relationships’. Journal of Marketing, 51: 11–27.
Dyer, J. H. (1996) ‘Specialized supplier networks as a source of competitive advantage: Evidence from
the auto industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 271–291.
Dyer, J. H. (1997) ‘Effective interfrm collaboration: How frms minimize transaction costs and maximize transaction value’. Strategic Management Journal, 18: 535–556.
Dyer, J. H., Kale, P. and Singh, H. (2001) ‘How to make strategic alliances work: Developing a dedicated
alliance function is key to building the expertise needed for competitive advantage’. Sloan Management Journal, 42: 37–43.
Dyer, J. H. and Nobeoka, K. (2000) ‘Creating and managing a high-performance knowledge-sharing
network: The Toyota case’. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 345–367.
Dyer, J. H. and Singh, H. (1998) ‘The relational view: Cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competitive advantage’. Academy of Management Review, 23: 660–679.

424
References
Dyer, J., Singh, H. and Kale, P. (2008) ‘Splitting the pie: Rent distribution in alliances and networks’.
Managerial and Decision Economics, 29: 137–148.
Eaves, D.,Weiss, J. and Visioni, L. J. (2003) ‘The relationship relaunch: How to fx a broken alliance’. Ivey
Business Journal, 67: 1–6.
Ebers, M. and Semrau,T. (2015) ‘What drives the allocation of specifc investments between buyer and
supplier?’. Journal of Business Research, 68: 415–424.
Ekici, A. (2013) ‘Temporal dynamics of trust in ongoing inter-organizational relationships’. Industrial
Marketing Management, 42: 932–949.
Endplastic (2019) ‘Innovative microalgae specialist TerraVia acquired by Corbion’. Available online at
https://endplasticwaste.org/en/about (accessed 8 November 2022).
Energyboom (2011) ‘Solazyme and Dow chemicals form algae partnership’. Available online at www.
energyboom.com/biofuels/solazyme-and-dow-chemical-form-algae-partnership (accessed 2 August 2011).
Energy Global (2015) ‘ExxonMobil and Sinopec announce joint technology development agreement’.
Available online at www.energyglobal.com/downstream/gas-processing/30032015/exxonmobil-andsinopec-announce-joint-technology-development-agreement-544/ (accessed 24 October 2016).
Engbers, P. A. (2021) ‘Heineken bewijst met James Bond dat wachten loont’. Available online at
www.adformatie.nl/campagnes/heineken-bewijst-met-james-bond-dat-wachten-loont#:~:
text=Heineken%20lanceert%20een%20nieuwe%20campagne,campagne%20is%20ontwikkeld%20
door%20Publicis (accessed 23 September 2022).
Erevelles, S., Stevenson,T. H., Srinivasan, S. and Fukawa, N. (2008) ‘An analysis of B2B ingredient cobranding relationships’. Industrial Marketing Management, 37: 940–952.
Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (1995) ‘The triple helix—university-industry-government relations:
A laboratory for knowledge-based economic development’. EASST Review, 14: 14–19.
Etzkowitz, H. and Leydesdorff, L. (1997) Universities in the global economy: A triple helix of university—
industry—government relations. London: Cassell Academic.
Evangelista, F. and Hau, L. N. (2009) ‘Organizational context and knowledge acquisition in IJVs: An
empirical study’. Journal of World Business, 44: 63–73.
Faems, D., Janssens, M., Madhok, A. and Van Looy, B. (2008) ‘Toward an integrative perspective on alliance governance: Connecting contract design, trust dynamics, and contract application’. Academy of
Management Journal, 51: 1053–1078.
Farrell, D. (1983) ‘Exit, voice, loyalty, and neglect as responses to job dissatisfaction—a multidimensionalscaling study’. Academy of Management Journal, 26: 596–607.
Faulkner, D. (1995) International strategic alliances: Co-operating to compete. Maidenhead: McGraw-Hill.
Federal Trade Commission (2006) ‘Analysis of agreement containing consent orders to aid public
comment: In the matter of the Procter & Gamble company and the Gillette company, fle no.
051–0115’. Available online at www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0510115/050930ana0510115.pdf (accessed
2 August 2011).
Fink, R. C., Edelman, L. F., Hatten, K. J. and James,W. L. (2006) ‘Transaction cost economics, resource
dependence theory, and customer—supplier relationships’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 15:
497–529.
Finkelstein, S. (1997) ‘Interindustry merger patterns and resource dependence:A replication and extension of Pfeffer (1972)’. Strategic Management Journal, 18: 787–810.
Fintech Finance (2016) ‘Mizuho fnancial group partners with cognizant to develop a blockchain
solution’. Available online at www.fntech.fnance/01-news/mizuho-fnancial-group-partnerswith-cognizant-to-develop-a-blockchain-solution-for-secure-record-keeping-and-improvedcustomer-experience/ (accessed 14 December 2016).
Flexiblepower Alliance Network (2016) ‘Flexiblepower Alliance Network’. Available online at http://
fexible-energy.eu/ (accessed 26 September 2016).
Fonda, D. (2006) ‘Who gains from a Pixar—Disney merger?’ Available online at www.time.com/time/
business/article/0,8599,1150674,00.html (accessed 2 August 2011).
Franco, M. and Haase, H. (2015) ‘Interfrm alliances:A taxonomy for SMEs’. Long Range Planning, 48(3):
168–181.
Franko, L. G. (1971) Joint venture survival in multinational corporations. New York: Praeger.

References
425
Freeman, R. E. (1984) Strategic management:A stakeholder approach. Boston, MA: Pitman.
Fried, I. (2011) ‘Nokia’s Microsoft partnership: Does the new strategy add up?’. Available online at
http://allthingsd.com/20110211/live-from-nokias-investor-meeting-does-the-new-strategyadd-up/ (accessed 2 August 2011).
Fryxell, G. E., Dooley, R. S. and Vryza, M. (2002) ‘After the ink dries:The interaction of trust and control
in US-based international joint ventures’. Journal of Management Studies, 39: 865–886.
Fu,W. H.,Wang, Q. and Zhao, X. D. (2017) ‘The infuence of platform service innovation on value cocreation activities and the network effect’. Journal of Service Management, 28(2): 348–388.
Furr, N., O’Keeffe, K. and Dyer, J. H. (2016) ‘Managing multiparty innovation’. Harvard Business Review,
94(11): 76–83.
Furrer, O., Tjemkes, B.V., Adolfs, K. and Ulgen Aydinlik, A. (2012) ‘Responding to adverse situations
within exchange relationships: The cross-cultural validity of a circumplex model’. Journal of CrossCultural Psychology, 43(6): 943–966.
Ganesan, S. (1993) ‘Negotiation strategies and the nature of channel relationships’. Journal of Marketing
Research, 30: 183–203.
García-Canal, E., Duarte, C. L., Criado, J. R. and Llaneza, A. V. (2002) ‘Accelerating international
expansion through global alliances: A typology of cooperative strategies’. Journal of World Business,
37: 91107.
García-Canal, E.,Valdes-Llaneza, A. and Ariño, A. (2003) ‘Effectiveness of dyadic and multi-party joint
ventures’. Organization Studies, 24: 743–770.
Garmin (2021) ‘Partnerbase’. Available online at www.partnerbase.com/garmin/ispot-tv (accessed 5
November 2022).
Garud, R. (1994) ‘Cooperative and competitive behaviors during the process of creative destruction’.
Research Policy, 23: 385–394.
Gelfand, M. J., Major,V. S., Raver, J. L., Nishii, L. H. and O’Brien, K. (2006) ‘Negotiating relationally:
The dynamics of the relational self in negotiations’. Academy of Management Review, 31: 427–451.
Genewsroom (2017a) ‘GE to replace Tva’s coal units with cleaner, high-effciency h-class gas turbines’.
Available online at www.genewsroom.com/press-releases/ge-replace-tva%E2%80%99s-coal-unitscleaner-high-effciency-h-class-gas-turbines-279403 (accessed 26 February 2017).
Genewsroom (2017b) ‘GE oil & gas secures long-term services contract to support Yara International’s
fertilizer complex in the Netherlands’. Available online at www.genewsroom.com/Press-Releases/
GE-Oil—Gas-Secures-Long-Term-Services-Contract-to-Support-Yara-Internationals-FertilizerComplex-in-the-Netherlands-213247 (accessed 26 February 2017).
Geringer, J. M. and Hebert, L. (1989) ‘Control and performance of international joint ventures’. Journal
of International Business Studies, 20(2): 235–254.
German Robotic Association (2020) ‘German Robotics Association launched’.Available online at www.
computer-automation.de/robotics-automation/german-robotics-association-launched (accessed 27
October 2022).
Geurts,A., Broekhuizen,T., Dolfsma,W. and Cepa, K. (2022) ‘Tensions in multilateral coopetition: Findings from the disrupted music industry’. Industrial Marketing Management, 105: 532–547.
Geylani,T., Inman, J. J. and Ter Hofstede, F. (2008) ‘Image reinforcement or impairment:The effects of
co-branding on attribute uncertainty’. Marketing Science, 27: 730–744.
Geyskens, I. and Steenkamp, J. (2000) ‘Economic and social satisfaction: Measurement and relevance to
marketing channel relationships’. Journal of Retailing, 76: 11–32.
Ghosh, A., Ranganathan, R. and Rosenkopf, L. (2016) ‘The impact of context and model choice on
the determinants of strategic alliance formation: Evidence from a staged replication study’. Strategic
Management Journal, 37: 2221–2224.
Ghoshal, S. and Moran, P. (1996) ‘Bad for practice:A critique of the transaction cost theory’. Academy of
Management Review, 21: 13–47.
Giller, C. and Matear, S. (2001) ‘The termination of inter-frm relationships’. Journal of Business and
Industrial Marketing, 16: 94–112.
Gilsing,V., Cloodt, M. and Rooijakkers, N. (2016) ‘From birth through transition to maturation:The evolution of technology-based alliance networks’. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 33: 181–200.

426
References
Gimeno, J. (2004) ‘Competition within and between networks: The contingent effect of competitive
embeddedness on alliance formation’. Academy of Management Journal, 15: 584–602.
Glaister, K.W. and Buckley, P. J. (1996) ‘Strategic motives for international alliance formation’. Journal of
Management Studies, 33: 301–332.
Glaister, K. W., Husan, R. and Buckley, P. J. (2003) ‘Decision-making autonomy in UK international
equity joint ventures’. British Journal of Management, 14: 305–322.
Global Energy Alliance (2022) ‘Global Energy Alliance for people and planet’.Available online at www.
energyalliance.org (accessed 30 October 2022).
Globenewswire (2022a) ‘Renault, Nissan & Mitsubishi Motors announce common roadmap alliance
2030: Best of 3 worlds for a new future’. Available online at www.globenewswire.com/newsrelease/2022/01/27/2373999/0/en/Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi-Motors-announce-commonroadmap-Alliance-2030-Best-of-3-worlds-for-a-new-future.html (accessed 17 October 2022).
Globenewswire (2022b) ‘Terrascope partners with DBS Bank, ERM and Orkiva to facilitate
decarbonization of enterprises’. Available online at www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/
11/03/2547302/0/en/Terrascope-partners-with-DBS-Bank-ERM-and-Workiva-to-facilitatedecarbonisation-of-enterprises.html (accessed 5 November 2022).
Gnyawali, D. R. and Park, B.-J. (2011) ‘Coopetition between giants: Collaboration with competitors for
technological innovation’. Research Policy, 40: 650–663.
Goerzen, A. and Beamish, P.W. (2005) ‘The effect of alliance network diversity on multinational enterprise performance’. Strategic Management Journal, 26: 333–354.
Golonka, M. (2015) ‘Proactive cooperation with strangers: Enhancing complexity of the ICT frms’ alliance portfolio and their innovativeness’. European Management Journal, 33: 168–178.
Gomes, E., Barnes, B. R. and Mahmood,T. (2016) ‘A 22 year review of strategic alliance research in the
leading management journals’. International Business Review, 25: 15–27.
Gomes, L., Facin, A., Salerno, M. and Ikenami, R. (2018) ‘Unpacking the innovation ecosystem construct: Evolution, gaps and trends’. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 136: 30–48.
Gomes-Casseres, B. (1994) ‘Group versus group: How alliance networks compete’. Harvard Business
Review, 72: 62–74.
Google (2022) ‘Google’. Available online at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google (accessed 30
October 2022).
GoPro (2016) ‘Two of the world’s strongest brands team up to cross-promote and innovate’. Available
online at http://gopro.com/news/gopro-and-red-bull-form-exclusive-global-partnership (accessed
22 December 2016).
Granovetter, M. S. (1973) ‘The strength of weak ties’. American Journal of Sociology, 78: 1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. S. (1985) ‘Economic action and social structure: A theory of embeddedness’. American
Journal of Sociology, 91: 481–510.
Greenberg, J. (1987) ‘A taxonomy of organizational justice theories’. Academy of Management Review, 12:
9–22.
GreenPeace (2021) ‘Greenpeace chief: Alliance to end plastic waste is misfring, as exposé reveals fagship project failure’. Available online at www.packaginginsights.com/news/greenpeace-chiefalliance-to-end-plastic-waste-is-misfring-as-expose-reveals-fagship-project-failure.html (accessed
8 November 2022).
Greve, H. R., Mitsuhashi, H. and Baum, J. A. (2013) ‘Greener pastures: Outside options and strategic
alliance withdrawal’. Organization Science, 24: 79–98.
Grimm, C., Knemeyer, M., Polyviou, M. and Ren, X. (2015) ‘Supply chain management research in
management journals:A review of recent literature (2004–2013)’. International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics Management, 45: 404–458.
Grooms, L. (2008) ‘Grainnet exclusive: Mercedes and algae?’ Biofuels Journal. Available online at www.
biofuelsjournal.com/articles/Mercedes___Algae__Solazyme_Road_Testing_Algae_based_Biodiesel_In_Mercedes-54315.html (accessed 2 August 2011).
Gu, J., Chen, Z., Huang, Q., Liu, H. and Huang, S. (2018) ‘A multilevel analysis of the relationship
between shared leadership and creativity in inter-organizational teams’. Journal of Creative Behavior,
52(2): 109–126.

References
427
Gu, Q. and Lu, X. H. (2014) ‘Unraveling the mechanisms of reputation and alliance formation: A study
of venture capital syndication in China’. Strategic Management Journal, 35: 739–750.
Guidice, R. M.,Vasudevan,A. and Duysters, G. (2003) ‘From “me against you” to “us against them”:Alliance formation based on inter-alliance rivalry’. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 135–152.
Gulati, R. (1995a) ‘Does familiarity breed trust—the implications of repeated ties for contractual choice
in alliances’. Academy of Management Journal, 38: 85–112.
Gulati, R. (1995b) ‘Social structure and alliance formation patterns:A longitudinal analysis’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40: 619–652.
Gulati, R. (1998) ‘Alliances and networks’. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 293–317.
Gulati, R. and Gargiulo, M. (1999) ‘Where do interorganizational networks come from?’. American Journal of Sociology, 104: 1439–1493.
Gulati, R., Khanna,T. and Nohria, N. (1994) ‘Unilateral commitments and the importance of process in
alliances’. Sloan Management Review, 35: 61–69.
Gulati, R. and Kletter, D. (2005) ‘Shrinking core, expanding periphery: The relational architecture of
high-performing organizations’. California Management Review, 47(3): 77–104.
Gulati, R. and Nickerson, J. A. (2008) ‘Interorganizational trust, governance choice, and exchange performance’. Organization Science, 19: 688–708.
Gulati, R. and Singh, H. (1998) ‘The architecture of cooperation: Managing coordination costs and
appropriation concerns in strategic alliances’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 43: 781–814.
Gulati, R. and Sytch, M. (2007) ‘Dependence asymmetry and joint dependence in interorganizational
relationships: Effects of embeddedness on a manufacturer’s performance in procurement relationships’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 52: 32–69.
Gulati, R., Sytch, M. and Mehrotra, P. (2008) ‘Breaking up is never easy: Planning for exit in a strategic
alliance’. California Review Management, 50: 147–163.
Gurcaylilar-Yenidogan,T. and Windsperger, J. (2014) ‘Inter-organizational performance in the automotive supply networks: The role of environmental uncertainty, specifc investments and formal contracts’. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 150: 813–822.
Hagedoorn, J. and Hesen, G. (2007) ‘Contract law and the governance of inter-frm technology partnerships—an analysis of different modes of partnering and their contractual implications’. Journal of
Management Studies, 44: 342–366.
Hagedoorn, J. and Sadowski, B. (1999) ‘The transition from strategic technology alliances to mergers and
acquisitions:An exploratory study’. Journal of Management Studies, 36: 87–107.
Haider, S. and Mariotti, F. (2016) ‘The orchestration of alliance portfolios:The role of alliance portfolio
capability’. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 32(3): 127–141.
Halinen,A. and Tahtinen, J. (2002) ‘A process theory of relationship ending’. International Journal of Service
Industry Management, 13: 163–180.
Hambrick, D. C., Li, J., Xin, K. and Tsui,A. S. (2001) ‘Compositional gaps and downward spirals in international joint venture management groups’. Strategic Management Journal, 22: 1033–1063.
Hamel, G. (1991) ‘Competition for competence and inter-partner learning within international strategic alliances’. Strategic Management Journal, 12: 83–103.
Hamel, G., Doz,Y. and Prahalad, C. (1989) ‘Collaborate with your competitors and win’. Harvard Business Review: 133–139.
Hannan, M.T. and Freeman, J. (1977) ‘Population ecology of organizations’. American Journal of Sociology,
82: 929–964.
Harbison, J. and Pekar, P. (1998) Smart alliances: A practical guide to repeatable success. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Harrigan, K. R. (1988) ‘Strategic alliances and partner asymmetries’. In Contractor, F. J. and Lorange, P.
(eds.), Cooperative strategies in international business. Lexington: Lexington Books.
Harrington, S. J. (1991) ‘What corporate America is teaching about ethics’. Academy of Management
Executive, 5: 21–30.
He, Q., Meadows, M., Angwin, D., Gomes, E. and Child, J. (2020) ‘Strategic alliance research in the era
of digital transformation: Perspectives on future research’. British Journal of Management, 31: 589–617.

428
References
Heide, J. B. and John, G. (1992) ‘Do norms matter in marketing relationships?’. Journal of Marketing, 56:
32–44.
Heide, J. B. and Miner, A. S. (1992) ‘The shadow of the future—effects of anticipated interaction and
frequency of contact on buyer—seller cooperation’. Academy of Management Journal, 35: 265–291.
Heide, J. B.,Wathne, K. H. and Rokkan,A. I. (2007) ‘Interfrm monitoring, social contracts, and relationship outcomes’. Journal of Marketing Research, 44: 425–433.
Heidl, R.A., Steensma, H. K. and Phelps, C. (2014) ‘Divisive faultlines and the unplanned dissolutions of
multipartner alliances’. Organization Science, 25: 1351–1371.
Heimeriks, K. H., Bingham, C. B. and Laamanen,T. (2015) ‘Unveiling the temporally contingent role of
codifcation in alliance success’. Strategic Management Journal, 36: 462–473.
Heimeriks, K. H. and Duysters, G. (2007) ‘Alliance capability as a mediator between experience and
alliance performance: An empirical investigation into the alliance capability development process’.
Journal of Management Studies, 44: 25–49.
Heimeriks, K. H., Klijn, E. and Reuer, J. J. (2009) ‘Building capabilities for alliance portfolios’. Long
Range Planning, 42: 96–114.
Hennart, J. F. (1988) ‘A transaction costs theory of equity joint ventures’. Strategic Management Journal, 9:
361–374.
Hennart, J. F. (2006) ‘Alliance research: Less is more’. Journal of Management Studies, 43: 1621–1628.
Hennart, J. F., Kim, D. J. and Zeng, M. (1998) ‘The impact of joint venture status on the longevity of
Japanese stakes in US manufacturing affliates’. Organization Science, 9: 382–395.
Hennart, J. F. and Zeng, M. (2005) ‘Structural determinants of joint venture performance’. European
Management Review, 2: 105.
HFN Daily News (2010) ‘Philips Sonicare partners with Susan G. Komen for the cure’.Available online at
www.hfnmag.com/housewares/philips-sonicare-partners-susan-g-komen-cure (accessed 2 August 2011).
Hill, R. C. and Hellriegel, D. (1994) ‘Critical contingencies in joint venture management—some lessons
from managers’. Organization Science, 5: 594–607.
Hirschman, A. O. (1970) Exit, voice and loyalty: Responses to decline in frms, organizations and states. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hite, J. M. and Hesterly,W. S. (2001) ‘The evolution of frm networks: From emergence to early growth
of the frm’. Strategic Management Journal, 22: 275–286.
Hitt, M. A., Dacin, M. T., Levitas, E., Arregle, J. L. and Borza, A. (2000) ‘Partner selection in emerging
and developed market contexts: Resource-based and organizational learning perspectives’. Academy
of Management Journal, 43: 449–467.
Ho, C-H., Böhm, S. and Monciardini, D. (2022) ‘The collaborative and contested interplay between
business and civil society in circular economy transitions’. Business Strategy and the Environment,
2714–2727.
Hoang, H. and Rothaermel, F.T. (2005) ‘The effect of general and partner-specifc alliance experience
on joint R&D project performance’. Academy of Management Journal, 48: 332–345.
Hoehn-Weiss, M. N. and Karim, S. (2014) ‘Unpacking functional alliance portfolios: How signals of
viability affect young frms’ outcomes’. Strategic Management Journal, 35: 1364–1385.
Hoffmann,W. H. (2005) ‘How to manage a portfolio of alliances’. Long Range Planning, 38: 121–143.
Hoffmann, W. H. (2007) ‘Strategies for managing a portfolio of alliances’. Strategic Management Journal,
28: 827–856.
Hoffmann, W. H. and Schlosser, R. (2001) ‘Success factors of strategic alliances in small and mediumsized enterprises:An empirical survey’. Long Range Planning, 34: 357–381.
Hofstede, G. (1991) Cultures and organizations: Software of the mind. London: McGraw Hill.
Hofstede, G. and Bond, M. H. (1988) ‘The Confucius connection: From cultural roots to economic
growth’. Organizational Dynamics, 16: 5–21.
Hogg, M. A., van Knippenberg, D. and Rast, D. E. III (2012) ‘Intergroup leadership in organizations:
Leading across group and organizational boundaries’. Academy of Management Review, 37(2): 232–255.
Horrel, P. (2016) ‘Mitsubishi has joined Renault-Nissan. Here’s what you need to know’. Available
online at www.topgear.com/car-news/mitsubishi-has-joined-renault-nissan-heres-what-you-needknow (accessed 1 December 2016).

References
429
House, R. J. (2004) Culture, leadership, and organizations:The GLOBE study of 62 societies. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Howard, M., Steensma, H. K., Lyles, M. and Dhanaraj, H. (2016) ‘Learning to collaborate through collaboration: How allying with expert frms infuences collaborative innovation within novice frms’.
Strategic Management Journal, 37: 2092–2103.
HSD (2016) ‘About HSD’. Available online at www.thehaguesecuritydelta.com/about (accessed 26
July 2016).
HSD (2022) ‘TNO and IMEC launch photonics collaboration: Pivotal role for Holst Centre in Eindhoven’.Available online at https://holstcentre.com/insights/news/tno-and-imec-launch-photonicscollaboration/ (accessed 14 November 2022).
Hubspot (2022a) ‘Sequoia, Google ventures, and Salesforce.com invest $32 million in HubSpot’. Available online at www.hubspot.com/blog/bid/10491/Sequoia-Google-Ventures-and-Salesforce-comInvest-32-Million-in-HubSpot (accessed 17 October 2022).
Hubspot (2022b) ‘HubSpot announces strategic partnership with Google Cloud, further fueling the
growth of the HubSpot CRM’. Available online at www.hubspot.com/company-news/hubspotannounces-strategic-partnership-with-google-cloud (accessed 17 October 2022).
Hutt, M. D., Stafford, E. R., Walker, B. A. and Reingen, P. H. (2000) ‘Case study: Defning the social
network of a strategic alliance’. Sloan Management Review, 41(2), 51–62.
Hwang, P. and Burgers,W. P. (1997) ‘The many faces of multi-frm alliances: Lessons for managers’. California Management Review, 39: 101–117.
Iansiti, M. and Levien, R. (2004) The Keystone Advantage:What the new dynamics of business ecosystems mean
for strategy, innovation, and sustainability. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
IBM (2007) ‘Lenovo and IBM expand global alliance’.Available online at www.-03.ibm.com/press/us/
en/pressrelease/21589.wss (accessed 2 August 2011).
IBM (2011a) ‘Our history of progress, 1890s to 2001’. Available online at www.-03.ibm.com/ibm/
history/interactive/ibm_ohe_pdf_13.pdf (accessed 28 September 2011).
IBM (2011b) ‘Louis V. Gerstner, Jr. CEO 1993–2002’. Available online at www.-03.ibm.com/press/us/
en/biography/10153.wss (accessed 28 September 2011).
IBM (2016) ‘It’s a brave new world out there’. Available online at www.-356.ibm.com/partnerworld/
wps/servlet/ContentHandler/partnerworld-public (accessed 2 December 2016).
IBM (2022a) ‘IBM and Vodafone join forces in exploration of quantum computing technology and
quantum-safe cryptography’. Available online at https://newsroom.ibm.com/2022–11–09-IBMand-Vodafone-Join-Forces-in-Exploration-of-Quantum-Computing-Technology-and-QuantumSafe-Cryptography (accessed 14 November 2022).
IBM (2022b) ‘Bosch partnering with IBM on strategic quantum computing materials science engagement’. Available online at https://newsroom.ibm.com/2022-11-09-Bosch-Partnering-with-IBMon-Strategic-Quantum-Computing-Materials-Science-Engagement (accessed 14 November 2022).
IBM (2022c) ‘Sierra Space and IBM collaborate on the next generation of space technology and software
platforms’. Available online at https://newsroom.ibm.com/2022-10-26-Sierra-Space-and-IBMCollaborate-on-the-Next-Generation-of-Space-Technology-and-Software-Platforms (accessed 14
November 2016).
IBM (2022d) ‘IBM transforms business operations with the RISE with SAP Solution in expanded partnership with SAP’. Available online at https://newsroom.ibm.com/2022-05-11-IBM-TransformsBusiness-Operations-with-the-RISE-with-SAP-Solution-in-Expanded-Partnership-with-SAP
(accessed 14 November 2022).
IBS Center for Management Research (ICMR) (2006) ‘Disney’s acquisition of Pixar, case # BSTR203’.
Available online at www.icmrindia.org/casestudies/catalogue/Business%20strategy/Business%20
Strategy%20Disney’s%20Acquisition%20of%20Pixar.htm (accessed 2 August 2011).
Inditex.com (2016) ‘Inditex and Coruña University set up an international researcher recruitment programme’.Available online at www.inditex.com/en/media/news_article?articleId=218413 (accessed
25 October 2016).
Inkpen, A. C. (2000) ‘Learning through joint ventures: A framework of knowledge acquisition’. Journal
of Management Studies, 37: 1019–1043.

430
References
Inkpen, A. C. and Beamish, P. W. (1997) ‘Knowledge, bargaining power, and the instability of international joint ventures’. Academy of Management Review, 22: 177–202.
Ireland, R. D., Hitt, M. A. and Vaidyanath, D. (2002) ‘Alliance management as a source of competitive
advantage’. Journal of Management, 28: 413–446.
Ireland, R. D. and Webb, J.W. (2007) ‘A multi-theoretic perspective on trust and power in strategic supply chains’. Journal of Operations Management, 25: 482–497.
Isabella, L.A. and Spekman, R. E. (2001) ‘Alliance leadership:Template for the future’. In Mobley,W. H.
and McCall, M.W. Jr. (eds.), Advances in global leadership (Vol. 2). Bongley: Emerald Group Publishing,
pp. 217–244.
Isckia, T. and Lescop, D. (2009) ‘Open innovation within business ecosystems: Lessons from Amazon.
com’. Communications & Strategies, 74: 37–55.
iSpotTV (2022) ‘iSpotTV’.Available online at www.ispot.tv/about (accessed 5 November 2022).
Jacobides, M. G. and Winter, S. G. (2005) ‘The co-evolution of capabilities and transaction costs: Explaining the institutional structure of production’. Strategic Management Journal, 26: 395–413.
Janowicz-Panjaitan, M. and Noorderhaven, N. G. (2008) ‘Formal and informal interorganizational learning within strategic alliances’. Research Policy, 37: 1337–1355.
Jap, S. D. (1999) ‘Pie-expansion efforts: Collaboration processes in buyer—supplier relationships’. Journal
of Marketing Research, 36: 461–475.
Jap, S. D. (2001) ‘“Pie sharing” in complex collaboration contexts’. Journal of Marketing Research, 38:
86–99.
Jap, S. D. and Ganesan, S. (2000) ‘Control mechanisms and the relationship life cycle: Implications for
safeguarding specifc investments and developing commitment’. Journal of Marketing Research, 37:
227–245.
Jarvensivu,T. and Moller, K. (2009) ‘Metatheory of network management: A contingency perspective’.
Industrial Marketing Management, 38: 654–661.
Jarzabkowski, P., Bednarek, R., Chalkias, K. and Cacciatori, E. (2021) ‘Enabling rapid fnancial response
to disasters: Knotting and reknotting multiple paradoxes in interorganizational systems’. Academy of
Management Journal, 65(5): 1477–1506.
Jemison, D. B. (1984) ‘The importance of boundary spanning roles in strategic decision making’. Journal
of Management Studies, 21: 131–152.
Jiang, R. J., Tao, Q. T. and Santoro, M. D. (2010) ‘Alliance portfolio diversity and frm performance’.
Strategic Management Journal, 31: 1136–1144.
Jiang, X., Li, M., Gao, S., Bao,Y. and Jiang, F. (2013) ‘Managing knowledge leakage in strategic alliances:
The effects of trust and formal contracts’. Industrial Marketing Management, 42: 983–991.
Johnson, J. P., Korsgaard, M. A. and Sapienza, H. J. (2002) ‘Perceived fairness, decision control, and
commitment in international joint venture management teams’. Strategic Management Journal, 23:
1141–1160.
Joshi,A. M. and Lahiri, N. (2015) ‘Language friction and partner selection in cross-border R&D alliance
formation’. Journal of International Business Studies, 46: 123–152.
Joshi,A.W. and Arnold, S. J. (1997) ‘The impact of buyer dependence on buyer opportunism in buyer—
supplier relationships:The moderating role of relational norms’.Psychology and Marketing,14: 823–845.
Joskow, P. L. (1985) ‘Vertical integration and long term contracts:The case of coal burning electric generation plants’. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 1: 33–80.
Kale, P., Dyer, J. H. and Singh, H. (2001) ‘Value creation and success in strategic alliances:Alliancing skills
and the role of alliance structure and systems’. European Management Journal, 19: 463–471.
Kale, P., Dyer, J. H. and Singh, H. (2002) ‘Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term alliance success:The role of the alliance function’. Strategic Management Journal, 23: 747–767.
Kale, P. and Singh, H. (2007) ‘Building frm capabilities through learning:The role of the alliance learning process in alliance capability and frm-level alliance success’. Strategic Management Journal, 28:
981–1000.
Kale, P. and Singh, H. (2009) ‘Managing strategic alliances:What do we know now, and where do we go
from here?’. Academy of Management Perspectives, 23: 45–62.

References
431
Kale, P., Singh, H. and Perlmutter, H. (2000) ‘Learning and protection of proprietary assets in strategic
alliances: Building relational capital’. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 217–237.
Kalouptsidi, M. (2021) ‘The role of shipping in world trade’. Available online at https://econofact.org/
the-role-of-shipping-in-world-trade (accessed 6 November 2022).
Kang, N. H. and Sakai, K. (2001) ‘New patterns of industrial globalization: Cross-border mergers and
acquisitions and strategic alliances’. Report of the Industry Division of the OECD: 1–174.
Kanter, R. M. (1994) ‘Collaborative advantage—the art of alliances’. Harvard Business Review, 72(4):
96–108.
Kaplan, R. S., Norton, D. P. and Rugelsjoen, B. (2010) ‘Managing alliances with the balanced score card’.
Harvard Business Review, 88(1): 114–120.
Kapoor, R. and Lee, J. M. (2013) ‘Coordinating and competing in ecosystems: How organizational forms
shape new technology investments’. Strategic Management Journal, 34: 274–296.
Katila, R., Rosenberger, J. D. and Eisenhardt, K. M. (2008) ‘Swimming with sharks:Technology ventures,
defense mechanisms and corporate relationships’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 53: 295–332.
Kaufmann, J. and O’Neill, H. M. (2007) ‘Do culturally distant partners choose different types of joint
ventures?’. Journal of Worm Business, 42: 435–448.
Kauppila, O. P. (2015) ‘Alliance management capability and frm performance: Using resource-based
theory to look inside the process black box’. Long Range Planning, 48: 151–167.
Keller,A., Lumineau, F., Mellewigt,T. and Ariño,A. (2021) ‘Alliance governance mechanisms in the face
of disruption’. Organization Science, 32(6): 1542–1570.
Kellogg (2022) ‘Kellogg and Nickelodeon’s green apple favored’. Available online at www.intribe.co/
blog/2022-brand-collaborations (accessed 18 October 2022).
Kelly, E. (2015) ‘Introduction: Business ecosystems coming of age’. In Canning, M. and Kelly, E.
(eds.), Business ecosystems coming of age. Stamford, CT: Deloitte University Press, pp. 3–12. Available
online at https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/platform-strategy-newlevel-business-trends/DUP_1048-Business-ecosystems-come-of-age_MASTER_FINAL.pdf
(accessed 22 February 2023).
Kelly, M. J., Schaan, J. and Joncas, H. (2002) ‘Managing alliance relationships: Key challenges in the early
stages of collaboration’. R&D Management, 32: 11–22.
Kersten, G. E. (2001) ‘Modeling distributive and integrative negotiations: Review and revised characterization’. Group Decision and Negotiation, 10: 493–514.
Khademi, B. (2020) ‘Ecosystem value creation and capture:A systematic review of literature and potential research opportunities’. Technology Innovation Management Review, 10(1): 16–34.
Khan, Z., Shenkar, O. and Lew,Y. K. (2015) ‘Knowledge transfer from international joint ventures to
local suppliers in a developing economy’. Journal of International Business Studies, 46: 656–675.
Khanagha, S. (2021) ‘Leading digital strategy’. In Tjemkes, B.V. and Mihalache, O. (eds.), Transformative
strategies: Strategic thinking in the age of globalization, disruption, collaboration and responsibility. Abingdon:
Taylor & Francis Ltd, pp. 82–103.
Khanna,T. (1998) ‘The scope of alliances’. Organization Science, 9: 340–355.
Khanna,T., Gulati, R. and Nohria, N. (1998) ‘The dynamics of learning alliances: Competition, cooperation, and relative scope’. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 193–210.
Kiefer, B. (2022) ‘Heineken drops its Heinekicks, a sneaker that lets wearers walk on beer’. Available
online at www.adweek.com/brand-marketing/heineken-drops-its-heinekicks-a-sneaker-that-letswearers-walk-on-beer/ (accessed 18 October 2022).
Killing, J. P. (1983) Strategies for joint venture success. New York: Praeger.
Kim, J. (2014) ‘Formal and informal governance in biotechnology alliances: Board oversight, contractual
control, and repeated deals’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23: 903–929.
King, L. (2015) ‘L’Oreal seeks quantum leap with 3D printed skin’. Available online at www.
forbes.com/sites/leoking/2015/05/20/loreal-3d-printed-skin-organovo/#11f1d918168e (accessed
6 August 2016).
Kipnis, D. and Schmidt, S. (1985) ‘The language of persuasion’. Psychology Today, 19: 40–46.

432
References
Kittel, J. (2013) ‘Strategic alliance manager role (identity): A unique, holistic and empowering perspective’. SPiBR.org LLC. Available online at www.spibr.org/strategic_alliance_manager_role.pdf
(accessed 10 July 2016).
Klein, B., Crawford, R. G. and Alchian, A. A. (1978) ‘Vertical integration, appropriable rents, and the
competitive contracting process’. Journal of Law and Economics, 21: 297–326.
Knight, L. (2002) ‘Network learning: Exploring learning by interorganizational networks’. Human Relations, 55: 427–454.
Knight, L. and Harland, C. (2005) ‘Managing supply networks: Organizational roles in network management’. European Management Journal, 23: 281–292.
Kogut, B. (1988) ‘Joint ventures—theoretical and empirical—perspectives’. Strategic Management Journal,
9: 319–332.
Kogut, B. (1989) ‘The stability of joint ventures: Reciprocity and competitive rivalry’. Journal of Industrial
Economics, 38: 183–198.
Kogut, B. (1991) ‘Joint ventures and the option to expand and acquire’. Management Science, 37: 19–33.
Köhler, J., Sönnichsen, S. D. and Beske-Jansen, P. (2022) ‘Towards a collaboration framework for circular
economy: The role of dynamic capabilities and open innovation’. Business Strategy and the Environment, 31(6): 2700–2713.
Kohtamäki, M., Rabetino, R. and Möller, K. (2018) ‘Alliance capabilities: A review and future research
directions’. Industrial Marketing Management, 68: 188–201.
Kok, G. and Wildeman, L. (1997) ‘Succesvolle allianties’. Nijenrode Management Review, 4: 78–84.
Koka, B. R. and Prescott, J. E. (2008) ‘Designing alliance networks:The infuence of network position,
environmental change, and strategy on frm performance’. Strategic Management Journal, 29: 639–661.
Kotabe, M., Martin, X. and Domoto, H. (2003) ‘Gaining from vertical partnerships: Knowledge transfer,
relationship duration, and supplier performance improvement in the U.S. and Japanese automotive
industries’. Strategic Management Journal, 24: 293–316.
Kotler, P. (1991) Marketing management:Analysis, planning, and control. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Koza, M. P. and Lewin, A. Y. (1998) ‘The co-evolution of strategic alliances’. Organization Science, 9:
255–264.
Koza, M. P. and Lewin, A.Y. (1999) ‘The coevolution of network alliances: A longitudinal analysis of an
international professional service network’. Organization Science, 10: 638–653.
Koza, M. P. and Lewin, A.Y. (2000) ‘Managing partnerships and strategic alliances: Raising the odds of
success’. European Management Journal, 16: 146–151.
Kramer, M.W., Day, E.A., Nguyen, C. and Cooper, O. D. (2019) ‘Leadership in an interorganizational collaboration:A qualitative study of a statewide interagency taskforce’. Human Relations, 72(2): 397–419.
Krishnan, R., Geyskens, I. and Steenkamp, J.-B. E. M. (2016) ‘The effectiveness of contractual and trustbased governance in strategic alliances under behavioral and environmental uncertainty’. Strategic
Management Journal, 37: 2521–2542.
Kumar, M.V. S. (2010) ‘Differential gains between partners in joint ventures: Role of resource appropriation and private benefts’. Organization Science, 21: 232–248.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K. and Steenkamp, J. (1995) ‘The effects of perceived interdependence on dealer
attitudes’. Journal of Marketing Research, 32: 348–356.
Kumar, R. (2016) ‘Alliance process:A micro behavioral view’. International Journal of Business and Management, 11: 20–30.
Kumar, R. and Nti, K. O. (1998) ‘Differential learning and interaction in alliance dynamics: A process
and outcome discrepancy model’. Organization Science, 9: 356–367.
Kwak, Y. H., Chih, Y. Y. and Ibbs, C. W. (2009) ‘Towards a comprehensive understanding of public—
private partnerships for infrastructure development’. California Management Review, 51: 51–78.
Lahiri, N. and Narayanan, S. (2013) ‘Vertical integration, innovation, and alliance portfolio size: Implication for frm performance’. Strategic Management Journal, 34: 1042–1064.
Lambe, C. J., Spekman, R. E. and Hunt, S. D. (2002) ‘Alliance competence, resources, and alliance success: Conceptualization, measurement, and initial test’. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 30:
141–158.

References
433
Lampel, J. and Shamsie, J. (2003) ‘Capabilities in motion: New organizational forms and the reshaping of
the Hollywood movie industry’. Journal of Management Studies, 40: 2189–2210.
Lane, P. J. and Lubatkin, M. (1998) ‘Relative absorptive capacity and interorganizational learning’. Strategic Management Journal, 19: 461–477.
Lane, P. J., Salk, J. E. and Lyles, M. A. (2001) ‘Absorptive capacity, learning, and performance in international joint ventures’. Strategic Management Journal, 22: 1139–1161.
Lardinois, F. (2015) ‘Amazon, Netfix, Google, Microsoft, Mozilla and others partner to create nextgen video format’.Available online at http://techcrunch.com/2015/09/01/amazon-netfix-googlemicrosoft-mozilla-and-others-partner-to-create-next-gen-video-format/ (accessed 27 July 2016).
Lavie, D. (2006) ‘The competitive advantage of interconnected frms:An extension of the resource-based
view’. Academy of Management Review, 31: 638–658.
Lavie, D. (2007) ‘Alliance portfolios and frm performance: A study of value creation and appropriation
in the US software industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 1187–1212.
Lavie, D., Haunschild, P. R. and Khanna, P. (2012) ‘Organizational differences, relational mechanisms, and
alliance performance’. Strategic Management Journal, 33: 1453–1479.
Lavie, D., Lechner, C. and Singh, H. (2007) ‘The performance implications of timing of entry and
involvement in multipartner alliances’. Academy of Management Journal, 50: 578–604.
Lavie, D. and Rosenkopf, L. (2006) ‘Balancing exploration and exploitation in alliance formation’. Academy of Management Journal, 49: 797–818.
Lavie, D. and Singh, H. (2012) ‘The evolution of alliance portfolios:The case of Unisys’. Industrial Corporate Change, 21: 763–809.
Lax, D.A. and Sebenius, J. K. (1986) The manager as negotiator: Bargaining for cooperation and competitive gain.
New York: Free Press.
Lee, H. U. and Park, J. H. (2008) ‘The infuence of top management team international exposure on
international alliance formation’. Journal of Management Studies, 45: 961–981.
Lee, J., Hoetker, G. and Qualls,W. (2015) ‘Alliance experience and governance fexibility’. Organization
Science, 26: 1536–1551.
Lee, S.-C., Chang, S.-N., Liu, C.-Y. and Yang, J. (2007) ‘The effect of knowledge protection, knowledge
ambiguity, and relational capital on alliance performance’. Knowledge and Process Management, 14:
58–69.
Lee,Y. and Cavusgil, S.T. (2006) ‘Enhancing alliance performance:The effects of contractual-based versus relational-based governance’. Journal of Business Research, 59: 896–905.
Lei, D. (2003) ‘Competition, cooperation and learning:The new dynamics of strategy and organisation
design for the innovation net’. International Journal of Technology Management, 26: 694–716.
Leipämaa-Leskinen, H., Närvänen, E. and Makkonen, H. (2022) ‘The rise of collaborative engagement
platforms’. European Journal of Marketing, 56(13): 26–49.
Leischnig, A., Geigenmueller, A. and Lohmann, S. (2014) ‘On the role of alliance management capability, organizational compatibility, and interaction quality in interorganizational technology transfer’.
Journal of Business Research, 67: 1049–1057.
Le Roy, F. and Fernandez, A. S. (2015) ‘Managing coopetitive tensions at the working-group level:The
rise of the coopetitive project team’. British Journal of Management, 26(4): 671–688.
Lewicki, R. J.,Weiss, S. E. and Lewin, D. (1992) ‘Models of confict, negotiation and 3rd party intervention—a review and synthesis’. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13: 209–252.
Lewis, R. (2004) ‘Renault/Nissan: A successful partnership’. Available online at www.carkeys.co.uk/
features/renaultnissan-successful-partnership (accessed 2 August 2011).
Li, J.T. and Hambrick, D. C. (2005) ‘Factional groups:A new vantage on demographic faultlines, confict,
and disintegration in work teams’. Academy of Management Journal, 48: 794–813.
Li, J. T., Tian, L. and Wan, G. (2015) ‘Contextual distance and the international strategic alliance performance: A conceptual framework and a partial meta-analytic test’. Management and Organization
Review, 11: 289–313.
Li, J. T., Xin, K. and Pillutla, M. (2002) ‘Multi-cultural leadership teams and organizational identifcation in international joint ventures’. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 13: 320–337.

434
References
Li, J.T., Xin, K. R.,Tsui, A. and Hambrick, D. C. (1999) ‘Building effective international joint venture
leadership teams in China’. Journal of World Business, 34(1): 52–68.
Li, L., Qian, G. and Qian, Z. (2013) ‘Do partners in international strategic alliances share resources, costs,
and risks?’. Journal of Business Research, 66: 489–498.
Lin, H. (2012) ‘Strategic alliances for environmental improvements’. Business & Society, 51(2), 335–348.
Lin, X. H. and Germain, R. (1998) ‘Sustaining satisfactory joint venture relationships:The role of confict resolution strategy’. Journal of International Business Studies, 29: 179–196.
Lin, Z.,Yang, H. B. and Arya, B. (2009) ‘Alliance partners and frm performance: Resource complementarity and status association’. Strategic Management Journal, 30: 921–940.
LinkedIn (2022a) ‘Alliance partner manager—phoenix market’.Available online at www.linkedin.com/
jobs/view/3328546623 (accessed 30 October 2022).
LinkedIn (2022b) ‘Alliance manager-Deloitte’. Available online at www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/
3280944673 (accessed 30 October 2022).
LinkedIn (2022c) ‘Alliance manager-Cisco’. Available online at www.linkedin.com/jobs/view/
3309656436 (accessed 30 October 2022).
Lipparini, A., Lorenzoni, G. and Ferriani, S. (2014) ‘From core to periphery and back: A study on the
deliberate shaping of knowledge fows in interfrm dyads and networks’. Strategic Management Journal,
35: 578–595.
Litwak, E. and Hylton, L. F. (1962) ‘Interorganizational analysis—a hypothesis on coordinating agencies’.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 6: 395–420.
Liu, L. A., Adair, W. L. and Bello, D. C. (2015) ‘Fit, misft, and beyond ft: Relational metaphors and
semantic ft in international joint ventures’. Journal of International Business Studies, 47: 830–849.
Liu,Y. and Ravichandran,T. (2015) ‘Alliance experience, IT-enabled knowledge integration, and ex ante
value gains’. Organization Science, 26: 511–530.
London,T., Rondinelli, D.A. and O’Neill, H. (2006) ‘Strange bedfellows:Alliances between corporations
and nonprofts’. In Shenkar, O. and Reuer, J. J. (eds.), Handbook of strategic alliances. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, pp. 353–366.
López-Duartea, C., González-Loureirob, M.,Vidal-Suáreza, M. M. and González-Díaza, B. (2016) ‘International strategic alliances and national culture: Mapping the feld and developing a research agenda’.
Journal of World Business, 51: 511–524.
López-Navarro, M. Á. and Camisón-Zornoza, C. (2003) ‘The effect of group composition and autonomy on the performance of joint ventures (JVs): An analysis based on Spanish export JVs’. International Business Review, 12: 17–39.
Lorenzoni, G. and Baden-Fuller, C. (1995) ‘Creating a strategic centre to manage a web of partners’.
California Management Review, 37: 1–18.
Loza, J. (2004) ‘Business—community partnerships: The case for community organization capacity
building’. Journal of Business Ethics, 53: 297–311.
Lubatkin, M., Florin, J. and Lane, P. (2001) ‘Learning together and apart:A model of reciprocal interfrm
learning’. Human Relations, 54: 1353–1382.
Lui, S. S. and Ngo, H.Y. (2004) ‘The role of trust and contractual safeguards on cooperation in nonequity alliances’. Journal of Management, 30: 471–485.
Lumineau, F., Eckerd, S. and Handley, S. (2015) ‘Inter-organizational conficts: Research overview, challenges, and opportunities’. Journal of Strategic Contracting and Negotiation, 1: 42–64.
Lumineau, F. and Oliveira, N. (2018) ‘A pluralistic perspective to overcome major blind spots in research
on interorganizational relationships’. Academy of Management Annals, 12: 440–465.
Lumineau, F.,Wang,W. and Schilke, O. (2020) ‘Blockchain governance—a new way of organizing collaborations?’. Organization Science, 32(2): 500–521.
Lunnan, R. and Haugland, S.A. (2008) ‘Predicting and measuring alliance performance:A multidimensional analysis’. Strategic Management Journal, 29: 545–556.
Luo,Y. D. (2002) ‘Contract, cooperation, and performance in international joint ventures’. Strategic Management Journal, 23: 903–919.
Luo,Y. D. (2005) ‘How important are shared perceptions of procedural justice in cooperative alliances?’.
Academy of Management Journal, 48: 695–709.

References
435
Luo,Y. D., Liu,Y.,Yang, Q., Maksomov,V. and Hou, J. (2015) ‘Improving performance and reducing cost
in buyer-supplier relationships: The role of justice in curtailing opportunism’. Journal of Business
Research, 68: 607–615.
Luo,Y. D. and Park, S. H. (2004) ‘Multiparty cooperation and performance in international equity joint
ventures’. Journal of International Business Studies, 35: 142–160.
Luvison, D. and Marks, M. A. (2013) ‘Team coordination in strategic alliances: Identifying conditions
that reduce team willingness to cooperate’. International Journal of Strategic Business Alliances, 3: 1–22.
Lyles, M. A. and Salk, J. E. (1996) ‘Knowledge acquisition from foreign parents in international joint
ventures: An empirical examination in the Hungarian context’. Journal of International Business Studies, 27: 877–904.
Lynn, M. L. (2005) ‘Organizational buffering: Managing boundaries and cores’. Organization Studies, 26:
37–61.
Lyons, T. F., Krachenberg, A. R. and Henke, J. W. (1990) ‘Mixed motive marriages—what’s next for
buyer—supplier relations?’ Sloan Management Review, 31: 29–36.
Macdonald, S. and Chrisp, T. (2005) ‘Acknowledging the purpose of partnership’. Journal of Business
Ethics, 59: 307–317.
Macmillan, I., Purowitz, M. and Prakash, S. (2022) ‘Charting new horizons: M&A and the path to thrive’.
Available online at https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/global/Documents/AboutDeloitte/gx-charting-new-horizons-ma-strategies.pdf (accessed 7 November 2022).
MacNeil, I. R. (1978) ‘Contracts—adjustment of long-term economic relations under classical, neoclassical, and relational contract law’. Northwestern University Law Review, 72: 854–905.
Madhok, A. (1995) ‘Opportunism and trust in joint venture relationships: An exploratory study and a
model’. Scandinavian Journal of Management, 11: 57–74.
Madhok, A., Keyhani, M. and Bossink, B. (2015) ‘Understanding alliance evolution and termination:
Adjustment costs and the economics of resource value’. Strategic Organization, 13(2): 91–116.
Madhok,A. and Tallman, S. B. (1998) ‘Resources, transactions and rents: Managing value through interfrm collaborative relationships’. Organization Science, 9: 326–339.
Majchrzak, A., Jarvenpaa, S. L. and Bagherzadeh, M. (2014) ‘A review of interorganizational collaboration dynamics’. Journal of Management, 41: 1338–1360.
Makhija, M.V. and Ganesh, U. (1997) ‘The relationship between control and partner learning in learning-related joint ventures’. Organization Science, 8: 508–527.
Makino, S., Chan, C. M., Isobe,T. and Beamish, P.W. (2007) ‘Intended and unintended termination of
international joint ventures’. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 1113–1132.
Malhotra, D. and Murnighan, J. K. (2002) ‘The effects of contracts on interpersonal trust’. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 47: 534–559.
March, J. G. (1991) ‘Exploration and exploitation in organizational learning’. Organization Science, 2: 71–78.
Marks, M. A. and Luvison, D. (2012) ‘Product launch and strategic alliance MTSs’. In Zaccaro, S. J.,
Marks, M. and DeChurch, L. A. (eds.), Multiteam systems:An organization form for dynamic and complex
environments. New York: Routledge, pp. 33–52.
Martino, M. (2010) ‘Galapagos, Roche enter $588.7m COPD alliance’. Available online at www.
fiercebiotech.com/story/galapagos-roche-enter-588–7m-copd-alliance/2010–01–11?utm_
medium=rss&utm_source=rss&cmp-id=OTC-RSS-FB0 (accessed 2 August 2011).
Masten, S. E., Meehan, J.W. and Snyder, E.A. (1991) ‘The cost of organization’. Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization, 7: 1–25.
M&S (2022) ‘M&S rewards customers for donating used clothing to Shwopping scheme’. Available online
at www.retailgazette.co.uk/blog/2022/01/ms-rewards-customers-for-donating-used-clothingto-shwopping-scheme/ (accessed 8 November 2022).
Mayer, K. J. and Argyres, N. S. (2004) ‘Learning to contract: Evidence from the personal computer industry’. Organization Science, 15: 394–410.
McCann, J. (2013) ‘007 effect lifts Heineken sales: Amount sold up to 5.2% after Bond swaps vodka
martini for beer’. Available online at www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2278331/007-effect-liftsHeineken-sales-Amount-sold-5–2-Bond-swaps-vodka-martini-beer.html (accessed 2 December
2016).

436
References
McGuire, M. (2002) ‘Managing networks: Propositions on what managers do and why they do’. Public
Administration Review, 62: 599–609.
Meena, A., Dhir, S. and Sushil, S. (2022) ‘A review of coopetition and future research agenda’. Journal of
Business & Industrial Marketing, 38: 118–136.
Meier, M. (2011) ‘Knowledge management in strategic alliances:A review of empirical evidence’. International Journal of Management Reviews, 13: 1–23.
Mellewigt, T. and Das, T. K. (2010) ‘Alliance structure choice in the telecommunications industry:
Between resource type and resource heterogeneity’. International Journal of Strategic Change Management, 2: 128–144.
Mercedes-Benz Group Media (2022) ‘Mercedes-Benz partners with Luminar to enhance pioneering work in next-generation automated driving systems’. Available online at https://group-media.
mercedes-benz.com/marsMediaSite/en/instance/ko/Mercedes-Benz-partners-with-Luminar-toenhance-pioneering-work-in-next-generation-automated-driving-systems.xhtml?oid=52432970
(accessed 17 October 2022).
Meschi, P.-X. (1997) ‘Longevity and cultural differences of international joint ventures: Toward timebased cultural management’. Human Relations, 50: 211–228.
Meschi, P.-X. (2005) ‘Environmental uncertainty and survival of international joint ventures:The case
of political and economical risk in emerging countries’. European Management Review, 2: 143–152.
Meta (2022a) ‘MetaL company offce’. Available online at https://about.meta.com/company-info/
(accessed 9 November 2022).
Meta (2022b) ‘Meta connect 2022: Meta Quest Pro, More social VR and a look into the future’.Available
online at https://about.fb.com/news/2022/10/meta-quest-pro-social-vr-connect-2022/ (accessed
9 November 2022).
Meyer-Krahmer, F. and Smoch, U. (1998) ‘Scientifc based technologies university—industry interaction
in four felds’. Research Policy, 27: 835–851.
Microsoft (2022a) ‘Microsoft details metaverse partnership with Facebook’. Available online at https://
businessplus.ie/news/microsoft-meta-metaverse (accessed 18 October 2022).
Microsoft (2022b) ‘Microsoft partner code of conduct’.Available online at www.microsoft.com/en-us/
legal/compliance/anticorruption/trustworthy-representatives (accessed 9 November 2022).
Microsoft (2022c) ‘Microsoft and Meta partner to deliver immersive experiences for the future of
work and play’. Available online at https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2022/10/11/microsoftand-meta-partner-to-deliver-immersive-experiences-for-the-future-of-work-and-play/ (accessed 9
November 2022).
Microsoft (2022d) ‘General’. Available online at www.microsoft.com/investor/reports/ar13/fnancialreview/business-description/index.html (accessed 9 November 2022).
Microsoft News Center (2001) ‘Microsoft and Nokia form global alliance to design, develop and market mobile productivity solutions’. Available online at www.microsoft.com/presspass/press/2009/
aug09/08–12pixipr.mspx (accessed 2 August 2011).
Mintzberg (2015) ‘Time for the plural sector’. Available online at http://ssir.org/articles/entry/time_
for_the_plural_sector (accessed 8 June 2017).
Mittelman, M. (2016) ‘JPMorgan to Adopt Fintech startups with in-house incubator’. Available online
at www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016–06–30/jpmorgan-to-adopt-fntech-startups-with-inhouse-incubator (accessed 16 January 2017).
Moghaddam, K., Bosse, D.A. and Provance, M. (2016) ‘Strategic alliances of entrepreneurial frms:Value
enhancing then value destroying’. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 10: 153–168.
Mohr, V., Garnsey, E. and Theyel, G. (2014) ‘The role of alliances in the early development of highgrowth frms’. Industrial and Corporate Change, 23: 233–259.
Moon, H. and Sprott, D. E. (2016) ‘Ingredient branding for a luxury brand:The role of brand and product ft’. Journal of Business Research, 69: 5768–5774.
Moore, J. F. (1993) ‘Predators and prey: A new ecology of competition’. Harvard Business Review, 71:
75–86.
Moore, J. F. (1996) The death of competition: Leadership and strategy in the age of business ecosystems. New
York: HarperBusiness.

References
437
Moore, J. F. (1998) ‘The rise of a new corporate form’. The Washington Quarterly, 21(1): 167–181.
Moore, J. F. (2006) ‘Business ecosystems and the view from the frm’. The Antitrust Bulletin, 51(1): 31–75.
Morgan, R. M. and Hunt, S. D. (1994) ‘The commitment-trust theory of relationship marketing’. Journal
of Marketing, 58: 20–38.
Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E. and Silverman, B. S. (1996) ‘Strategic alliances and interfrm knowledge
transfer’. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 77–91.
Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E. and Silverman, B. S. (1998) ‘Technological overlap and interfrm cooperation:
Implications for the resource-based view of the frm’. Research Policy, 27: 507–523.
Muthusamy, S. K. and White, M. A. (2005) ‘Learning and knowledge transfer in strategic alliances:
A social exchange view’. Organization Studies, 26: 415–441.
Nabec, L., Pras, B. and Laurent, G. (2016) ‘Temporary brand-retailer alliance model:The routes to purchase intentions for selective brands and mass retailers’. Journal of Marketing Management, 32: 595–627.
Nair,A., Narasimhan, R. and Bendoly, E. (2011) ‘Coopetitive buyer—supplier relationship:An investigation of bargaining power, relational context, and investment strategies’. Decision Sciences, 42: 93–127.
Nakamura, M., Shaver, J. M. and Yeung, B. (1996) ‘An empirical investigation of joint venture dynamics:
Evidence from US—Japan joint ventures’. International Journal of Industrial Organization, 14: 521–541.
NBS (2022) ‘Partnering with NGOs:The 4 keys to success’.Available online at https://nbs.net/partneringwith-ngos-the-4-keys-to-success/ (accessed 8 November 2022).
NEA (2022) ‘DBSD foundation and national environment agency to engage Singapore’s youth in
nationwide challenge to reduce food waste’. Available online at www.nea.gov.sg/media/news/
news/index/dbs-foundation-and-national-environment-agency-to-engage-singapore-s-youth-innationwide-challenge-to-reduce-food-waste (accessed 5 November 2022).
Nemeth, A. and Nippa, M. (2013) ‘Rigor and relevance of IJV exit research’. Management International
Review, 53: 449–475.
Niederkofer, M. (1991) ‘The evolution of strategic alliances—opportunities for managerial infuence’.
Journal of Business Venturing, 6: 237–257.
Niesten, E. and Jolink, A. (2015) ‘The impact of alliance management capabilities on alliance attributes
and performance:A literature review’. International Journal of Management Reviews, 17: 69–100.
Niesten, E. and Jolink, A. (2020) ‘Motivations for environmental alliances: Generating and internalizing
environmental and knowledge value’. International Journal of Management Reviews, 22: 356–377.
Niesten, E. and Stefan, I. (2019) ‘Embracing the paradox of interorganizational value co-creation andvalue capture: A literature review towards paradox resolution’. International Journal of Management
Reviews, 21: 231–255.
Nippa, M. and Reuer, J. J. (2019) ‘On the future of international joint venture research’. Journal of International Business Studies, 50: 555–597.
Noble, G. and Jones, R. (2006) ‘The role of boundary-spanning managers in the establishment of public—
private partnerships’. Public Administration, 84: 91–117.
Noel, J. (2022) ‘EY announces alliance with Logility to help provide insights-driven supply chain
management’. Available online at www.ey.com/en_gl/news/2022/06/ey-announces-alliance-withlogility-to-help-provide-insights-driven-supply-chain-management (accessed 17 October 2022).
Nokia (2011) ‘Nokia and Microsoft sign defnitive agreement ahead of schedule’. Available online at
http://press.nokia.com/2011/04/21/nokia-and-microsoft-sign-defnitive-agreement-ahead-ofschedule/ (accessed 2 August 2011).
Nonaka, I. (1994) ‘A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation’. Organization Science, 5:
14–37.
Nooteboom, B. (2004) ‘Governance and competence: How can they be combined?’ Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 28: 505–525.
Norman, P. M. (2002) ‘Protecting knowledge in strategic alliances: Resource and relational characteristics’. Journal of High Technology Management Research, 13: 177–202.
Noseleit, F. and de Faria, P. (2013) ‘Complementarities of internal R&D and alliances with different
partner types’. Journal of Business Research, 66: 2000–2006.
Olekalns, M., Smith, P. L. and Walsh,T. (1996) ‘The process of negotiating: Strategy and timing as predictors of outcomes’. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 68: 68–77.

438
References
Oliveira, N. and Lumineau, F. (2019) ‘The dark side of interorganizational relationships: An integrative
review and research agenda’. Journal of Management, 45(1): 231–261.
Oneworld Trust (2009) ‘2008 global accountability report’. Available online at http://oneworld trust.
org/publications/doc_view/270–2008-cargill-accountability-profle?tmpl=component&format=
raw (accessed 2 August 2011).
Oral Health America (2008) ‘Philips Sonicare partners with OHA to conduct public opinion survey of
oral health in America’. Available online at www.orthodontic productsonline.com/news/2008–05–
16_01.asp (accessed 2 August 2011).
Organovo (2015) ‘L’Oreal USA announces research partnership with Organovo to Develop 3-D bioprinted skin tissue’. Available online at http://ir.organovo.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=254194&p=irolnewsArticle&ID=2129344 (accessed 6 August 2016).
Organovo (2022) ‘Organovo and BICO (CELLINK) Reach Licensing Agreement on bioprinting patents’. Available online at https://ir.organovo.com/news-releases/news-release-details/organovoand-bico-cellink-reach-licensing-agreement-bioprinting (accessed 5 November 2022).
Osborn, R. N. and Baughn, C. C. (1990) ‘Forms of interorganizational governance for multinational
alliances’. Academy of Management Journal, 33: 503–519.
Oxfam (2016a) ‘Working together: Oxfam’s partnership principles’. Available online at www.oxfam.
org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/file_attachments/story/oxfam-partnership-principles_1_0.pdf
(accessed 2 December 2016).
Oxfam (2016b) ‘M&S and Oxfam shwopping’.Available online at www.oxfam.org.uk/donate/donategoods/mands-and-oxfam-shwopping (accessed 2 December 2016).
Oxfam (2021) ‘Marks and Spencer and OXFAM shwopping’. Available online at www.oxfam.org.uk/
donate/donate-to-our-shops/marks-and-spencer-and-oxfam-shwopping/ (accessed 8 November
2022).
Oxley, J. E. (1997) ‘Appropriability hazards and governance in strategic alliances: A transaction cost
approach’. Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 13: 387–409.
Oxley, J. E. (1999) ‘Institutional environment and the mechanisms of governance:The impact of intellectual property protection on the structure of inter-frm alliances’. Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 38: 283–309.
Oxley, J. E. and Sampson, R. C. (2004) ‘The scope and governance of international R&D alliances’.
Strategic Management Journal, 25: 723–749.
Oxley, J. E. and Wada,T. (2009) ‘Alliance structure and the scope of knowledge transfer: Evidence from
US—Japan agreements’. Management Science, 55: 635–649.
Ozmel, U. and Guler, I. (2015) ‘Small fsh, big fsh:The performance effects of the relative standing in
partners’ affliate portfolios’. Strategic Management Journal, 36: 2039–2057.
Packaginginsights (2021) ‘Alliance to end plastic waste fres back at Greenpeace over criticism of
fagship project failure’. Available online at www.packaginginsights.com/news/alliance-to-endplastic-waste-fres-back-at-greenpeace-over-criticism-of-fagship-project-failure.html (accessed 8
November 2022).
Palmatier, R.W., Dant, R. R. and Grewal, D. (2007) ‘A comparative longitudinal analysis of theoretical
perspectives of interorganizational relationship performance’. Journal of Marketing, 71: 172–194.
Pangarkar, N. (2009) ‘Do frms learn from alliance terminations? An empirical examination’. Journal of
Management Studies, 46: 982–1004.
Pangarkar, N. and Klein, S. (1998) ‘Bandwagon pressures and inter-frm alliances in the global pharmaceutical industry’. Journal of International Marketing, 6: 54–73.
Panteli, N. and Sockalingam, S. (2005) ‘Trust and confict within virtual inter-organizational alliances:
A framework for facilitating knowledge sharing’. Decision Support Systems, 39: 599–617.
Panwar, R. and Niesten, E. (2022) ‘Jump-starting, diffusing, and sustaining the circular economy’. Business Strategy and the Environment, 31(6): 2637–2640.
Panwar, R., Pinkse, J. and De Marchi,V. (2022) ‘The future of global supply chains in a post-COVID-19
world’. California Management Review, 64: 2, 5–23.
Parise, S. and Casher,A. (2003) ‘Alliance portfolios: Designing and managing your network of businesspartner relationships’. Academy of Management Executive, 17: 25–39.

References
439
Park, C.W., Jun, S.Y. and Shocker,A. D. (1996) ‘Composite branding alliances:An investigation of extension and feedback effects’. Journal of Marketing Research, 33: 453–466.
Park, G., Kim, M. J. and Kang, J. (2015) ‘Competitive embeddedness: The impact of competitive relations among a frm’s current alliance partners on its new alliance formations’. International Business
Review, 24: 196–208.
Park, S. H. and Russo, M.V. (1996) ‘When competition eclipses cooperation:An event history analysis of
joint venture failure’. Management Science, 42: 875–890.
Park, S. H. and Ungson, G. R. (1997) ‘The effect of national culture, organizational complementarity,
and economic motivation on joint venture dissolution’. Academy of Management Journal, 40: 279–307.
Parkhe,A. (1991) ‘Interfrm diversity, organizational learning, and longevity in global strategic alliances’.
Journal of International Business Studies, 22: 579–601.
Parkhe, A. (1993) ‘Strategic alliance structuring: A game theoretic and transaction cost examination of
interfrm cooperation’. Academy of Management Journal, 36: 794–829.
Patzelt, H. and Shepherd, D.A. (2008) ‘The decision to persist with underperforming alliances: The role
of trust and control’. Journal of Management Studies, 45: 1217–1243.
PC World (2009) ‘Microsoft, Nokia target ‘Crackberry’ crowd with Mobile Offce’. Available online
at www.pcworld.com/businesscenter/article/170091/microsoft_nokia_target_crackberry_crowd_
with_mobile_offce.html (accessed 2 August 2011).
Pearce, R. J. (2001) ‘Looking inside the joint venture to help understand the link between inter-parent
cooperation and performance’. Journal of Management Studies, 38: 557–582.
Pekar, P. and Allio, R. (1994) ‘Making alliances work—guidelines for success’. Long Range Planning, 27:
54–65.
Peng, M.W. and Shenkar, O. (2002) ‘Joint venture dissolution as corporate divorce’. Academy of Management Executive, 16: 92–105.
Perkmann, M., Neely, A. and Walsh, K. (2011) ‘How should frms evaluate success in university—
industry alliances? A performance measurement system’. R&D Management, 41: 202–216.
Pfeffer, J. and Nowak, P. (1976) ‘Joint ventures and interorganizational interdependence’. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 21: 398–418.
Pfeffer, J. and Salancik, G. R. (1978) The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective.
New York: Harper and Row.
Pfzer (2020) ‘Pfzer and BioNTech announce vaccine candidate against COVID-19 achieved success in frst interim analysis from phase 3 study’. Available online at www.pfzer.com/news/pressrelease/press-release-detail/pfzer-and-biontech-announce-vaccine-candidate-against (accessed 17
October 2022).
PG (2022) ‘Oral-B partners to make oral care more inclusive’. Available online at https://us.pg.com/
blogs/oralb-partners-iadh-to-make-oral-care-more-inclusive/ (accessed 5 November 2022).
Philips (2004) ‘Philips en Procter & Gamble kondigen alliantie aan voor de introductie van de Intelliclean van Philips’ Sonicare® en Crest®’. Available online at www.newscenter.philips.com/nl_nl/
standard/about/news/press/article-14525.wpd (accessed 2 August 2011).
Ping, R. A. (1993) ‘The effects of satisfaction and structural constraints on retailer exiting, voice, loyalty,
opportunism, and neglect’. Journal of Retailing, 69: 320–352.
Pisano, G. P. (1989) ‘Using equity participation to support exchange—evidence from the biotechnology
industry’. Journal of Law Economics and Organization, 5: 109–126.
Pixar Planet Forum (2008) ‘The truth about the Disney/Pixar partnership . . . many answers’. Available
online at www.pixarplanet.com/forums/viewtopic.php?f=6&t=2945&start=0 (accessed 2 August
2011).
Pondera (2022) ‘Elements for energy’. Available online at https://ponderaconsult.com/en/ (accessed 6
November 2022).
Poniatowski, M., Lüttenberg, H., Beverungen, D. and Kundish, D. (2022) ‘Three layers of abstraction:
A conceptual framework for theorizing digital multi-sided platforms’.Information Systems and e-Business
Management, 20: 257–283.
Poole, M. S. and van de Ven, A. H. (1989).‘Using paradox to build management and organization theories’. Academy of Management Review, 14(4): 562–578.

440
References
Poppo, L. and Zenger,T. (2002) ‘Do formal contracts and relational governance function as substitutes
or complements?’ Strategic Management Journal, 23: 707–725.
Poppo, L. and Zhou, K. Z. (2014) ‘Managing contracts for fairness in buyer-supplier exchanges’. Strategic
Management Journal, 35: 1508–1527.
Porter, M. E. (1987) ‘From competitive strategy to cooperative strategy’. Harvard Business Review, 65:
43–59.
PovertyAlliance (2022) ‘Poverty alliance’. Available online at www.povertyalliance.org (accessed 30
October 2022).
Powell,W.W. (1990) ‘Neither market nor hierarchy—network forms of organization’. Research in Organizational Behavior, 12: 295–336.
Powell,W.W., Koput, K.W. and SmithDoerr, L. (1996) ‘Interorganizational collaboration and the locus
of innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41: 116–145.
PRNewswire (2015) ‘AT&T and GE strengthen alliance, fuel innovation with smart energy solutions:
Technology leaders work together to bring new opportunities to energy sector’. Available online at
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/att-and-ge-strengthen-alliance-fuel-innovation-with-smartenergy-solutions-300030432.html (accessed 3 January 2017).
PRNewswire (2016) ‘Lendico and PostFinance launch joint venture in Switzerland’.Available online at
www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/lendico-and-postfnance-launch-joint-venture-in-switzerland586285301.html (accessed 25 October 2016).
Proctor & Gamble (2017) ‘What is connect + develop’. Available online at www.pgconnectdevelop.
com/what-is-connect-develop/ (accessed 17 February 2017).
Pruitt, D. G. (1983) ‘Strategic choice in negotiation’. American Behavioral Scientist, 27: 167–194.
Pruitt, D. G. and Lewis, S.A. (1975) ‘Development of integrative solutions in bilateral negotiation’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31: 621–633.
PR Web (2008) ‘Worldwide market for personal care appliances to reach 460 million units by 2010,
according to a new report by Global Industry Analysts, Inc’. Available online at www.prweb.com/
releases/appliances_personal_care/hair_care_oral_care/prweb765894.htm (accessed 2 August 2011).
PWC (2016) ‘Redefning business success in a changing world: CEO survey’. PWC 19th Annual Global
CEO Survey. Available online at https://www.pwc.com/kz/en/publications/ceo-assets/pwc-19thannual-global-ceo-survey.pdf.
Rahman, N. and Korn, H. J. (2014) ‘Alliance longevity: Examining relational and operational antecedents’. Long Range Planning, 47: 245–261.
Rai, R. K. (2016) ‘A co-opetition-based approach to value creation in interfrm alliances: Construction
of a measure and examination of its psychometric properties’. Journal of Management, 42: 1663–1699.
Rajan, R., Dhir, S. and Sushil (2020) ‘Alliance termination research:A bibliometric review and research
agenda’. Journal of Strategy and Management, 13(3): 351–375.
Rao,A. and Schmidt, S. M. (1998) ‘A behavioral perspective on negotiating international alliances’. Journal of International Business Studies, 29: 665–693.
Renault (2010) ‘The Renault—Nissan alliance’. Available online at www.renault.com/en/groupe/lalliance-renault-nissan/pages/l-alliance-renault-nissan.aspx (accessed 2 August 2011).
Renault–Nissan–Mitsubishi Alliance (2022) ‘Renault—Nissan—Mitsubishi Alliance’. Available online
at https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renault—Nissan—Mitsubishi_Alliance (accessed 17 October
2022).
Reuer, J. J. and Ariño,A. (2007) ‘Strategic alliance contracts: Dimensions and determinants of contractual
complexity’. Strategic Management Journal, 28: 313–330.
Reuer, J. J., Klijn, E. and Lioukas, C. S. (2014) ‘Board involvement in international joint venture’. Strategic
Management Journal, 35: 1626–1644.
Reuer, J. J. and Ragozzino, R. (2005) ‘Agency hazards and alliance portfolios’. Strategic Management
Journal, 27: 27–43.
Reuer, J. J. and Tong, T. W. (2005) ‘Real options in international joint ventures’. Journal of Management,
31: 403–423.
Reuer, J. J. and Zollo, M. (2005) ‘Termination outcomes of research alliances’.Research Policy,34: 101–115.

References
441
Revilla, E., Sarkis, J. and Acosta, J. (2005) ‘Towards a knowledge management and learning taxonomy for
research joint ventures’. Technovation, 25: 1307–1316.
Reynolds, M. and Yuthas, K. (2008) ‘Moral discourse and corporate social responsibility reporting’. Journal of Business Ethics, 78: 47–64.
Ring, P. S. (2000) ‘The three T’s of alliance creation:Task, team, and time’. European Management Journal,
18: 152–163.
Ring, P. S. and Van de Ven, A. H. (1994) ‘Developmental processes of cooperative interorganizational
relationships’. Academy of Management Review, 19: 90–118.
Ritchie, H. and Roser, M. (2022) ‘Energy mix’.Available online at https://ourworldindata.org/energymixaccessed (accessed 9 June 2022).
Robson, M. J., Leonidou, L. C. and Katsikeas, C. S. (2002) ‘Factors infuencing international joint venture
performance: Theoretical perspectives, assessment, and future directions’. Management International
Review, 42: 385–418.
Rochemont, M. H. (2010) Opening up for innovation: The antecedents of multi-partner alliance performance.
Eindhoven:Technical University Eindhoven.
Rockmann, K.W., Pratt, M. G. and Northcraft, G. B. (2007) ‘Divided loyalties—determinants of identifcation in interorganizational teams’. Small Group Research, 38: 727–751.
Rondinelli, D.A. and London,T. (2003) ‘How corporations and environmental groups cooperate:Assessing cross-sector alliances and collaborations’. Academy of Management Executive, 17: 61–76.
Rusbult, C. E., Zembrodt, I. M. and Gunn, L. K. (1982) ‘Exit, voice, loyalty, and neglect—responses to
dissatisfaction in romantic involvements’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43: 1230–1242.
Russo, M.V. (1992) ‘Power plays—regulation, diversifcation, and backward integration in the electric
utility industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 13: 13–27.
RWE (2021) ‘50 billion euros, 50 gigawatts of capacity by 2030: RWE launches investment and
growth offensive’. Available online at www.rwe.com/en/press/rwe-ag/2021-11-15-rwe-launchesinvestment-and-growth-offensive (accessed 7 November 2022).
RWE (2022) ‘RWE history, from 1898 until today: Over 120 years of successful history’.Available online
at www.rwe.com/en/the-group/history (accessed 7 November 2022).
Ryall, M. D. and Sampson, R. (2009) ‘Formal contracts in the presence of relational enforcement mechanisms: Evidence from technology development projects’. Management Science, 55: 906–925.
Ryan-Charleton,T. and Gnyawali, D. R. (2022) ‘Value creation tension in coopetition:Virtuous cycles
and viscous cycles’. Strategic Management Review. Available online at extension://bfdogplmndidlpjfhoijckpakkdjkkil/pdf/viewer.html?file=https%3A%2F%2Fstrategicmanagementreview.
net%2Fassets%2Farticles%2FRyan-Charleton%2520and%2520Gnyawali.pdf.
Ryan-Charleton,T., Gnyawali, D. R. and Oliveira, N. (2022) ‘Strategic alliance outcome: Consolidation
and new directions’. Academy of Management Annals, 16: 719–758.
Sadovnikova, A. and Pujari, A. (2017) ‘The effect of green partnerships on frm value’. Journal of the
Academy Marketing Science, 45(2): 251–267.
Salk, J. E. (2005) ‘Often called for but rarely chosen:Alliance research that directly studies process’. European Management Review, 2: 117–122.
Salk, J. E. and Brannen, M.Y. (2000) ‘National culture, networks, and individual infuence in a multinational management team’. Academy of Management Journal, 43: 191–202.
Salk, J. E. and Shenkar, O. (2001) ‘Social identities in an international joint venture:An exploratory case
study’. Organization Science, 12: 161–178.
Salvato, C., Reuer, J. J. and Battigalli, P. (2017) ‘Cooperation across disciplines:A multilevel perspective on
cooperative behavior in governing interfrm relations. Academy of Management Annals, 11: 960–1004.
Sampson, R. C. (2004a) ‘The cost of misaligned governance in R&D alliances’. Journal of Law Economics
and Organization, 20: 484–526.
Sampson, R. C. (2004b) ‘Organizational choice in R&D alliances: Knowledge-based and transaction
cost perspectives’. Managerial and Decision Economics, 25: 421–436.
Sampson, R. C. (2005) ‘Experience effects and collaborative returns in R&D alliances’. Strategic Management Journal, 26: 1009–1031.

442
References
Samuelsen, B. M., Olsen, L. E. and Keller, K. L. (2015) ‘The multiple roles of ft between brand alliance
partners in alliance attitude formation’. Marketing Letters, 26: 619–629.
Sanzo-Pérez, M. J. and Álvarez-González, L. (2022) ‘Partnerships between Spanish social enterprises and
nonprofts:A rich hybridity-based setting for social innovation’. Technovation, 110: 102376.
SAP (2022) ‘What is SAP?’. Available online at www.sap.com/about/company/what-is-sap.
html#:~:text=What%20does%20SAP%20do%3F,midsize%20companies%2C%20and%20large%20
corporations (accessed 24 September 2022).
Sarkar, M. B., Aulakh, P. S. and Madhok, A. (2009) ‘Process capabilities and value generation in alliance
portfolios’. Organization Science, 20: 583–600.
Sarkar, M. B., Echambadi, R., Cavusgil, S.T. and Aulakh, P. S. (2001) ‘The infuence of complementarity,
compatibility, and relationship capital on alliance performance’. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 29: 358–373.
Saxton,T. (1997) ‘The effects of partner and relationship characteristics on alliance outcomes’. Academy
of Management Journal, 40: 443–461.
SBMC (2022a) ‘Smart Biomaterials Consortium (SBMC) members announce frst collaboration to
prevent thousands of amputations worldwide’. Available online at www.globenewswire.com/
news-release/2022/07/08/2476448/0/en/Smart-Biomaterials-Consortium-SBMC-membersannounce-frst-collaboration-to-prevent-thousands-of-amputations-worldwide.html (accessed 8
November 2022).
SBMC (2022b) ‘Corbion helps reduce emissions from agriculture through support for Cargill soil health
program’. Available online at www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/10/20/2537951/0/
en/Corbion-helps-reduce-emissions-from-agriculture-through-support-for-Cargill-soil-healthprogram.html (accessed 8 November 2022).
SBR (2022) ‘DBS launch 5 partnerships enhance SMES digital supply chain capabilities’. Available
online at https://sbr.com.sg/news/dbs-launch-5-partnerships-enhance-smes-digital-supply-chaincapabilities (accessed 5 November 2022).
Schaan, J. L. (1983) ‘Parent control and joint venture success:The case of Mexico’. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation. University of Western Ontario.
Scheer, L. K., Kumar, N. and Steenkamp, J. (2003) ‘Reactions to perceived inequity in US and Dutch
interorganizational relationships’. Academy of Management Journal, 46: 303–316.
Schifrin, M. (2001) ‘Is your company magnetic?’ Forbes, May 21, p. 16.
Schilke, O. and Cook, K. S. (2015) ‘Sources of alliance partner trustworthiness: Integrating calculative
and relational perspectives’. Strategic Management Journal, 36: 276–297.
Schilke, O. and Goerzen, A. (2010) ‘Alliance management capability: An investigation of the construct
and its measurement’. Journal of Management, 36: 1192–1219.
Schneider, S. C. and Barsoux, J.-L. (1997) Managing across cultures. London: Prentice-Hall.
Schoenmakers,W. and Duysters, G. (2006) ‘Learning in strategic technology alliances’. Technology Analysis and Strategic Management, 18: 245–264.
Schreiner, M., Kale, P. and Corsten, D. (2009) ‘What really is alliance management capability and how
does it impact alliance outcomes and success?’ Strategic Management Journal, 30: 1395–1419.
Scott, J. (2000) Social network analysis:A handbook. London: Sage Publications.
Scott, W. R. (2003) Organizations: Rational, natural and open systems. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Segil, L. (1998) Measuring the value of partnering: How to use metrics, to plan, develop, and implement successful
alliances. New York:Amacom.
Shan,W. J.,Walker, G. and Kogut, B. (1994) ‘Interfrm cooperation and startup innovation in the biotechnology industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 15: 387–394.
Shenkar, O. and Zeira,Y. (1992) ‘Role-confict and role ambiguity of chief executive offcers in international joint ventures’. Journal of International Business Studies, 23: 55–75.
Shih,W. C. (2020) ‘Global supply chains in a post-pandemic world: Companies need to make their networks more resilient. Here’s how’. Harvard Business Review, 98(5): 82–89.
Shortell, S. M. and Zajac, E. J. (1988) ‘Internal corporate joint ventures—development processes and
performance outcomes’. Strategic Management Journal, 9: 527–542.

References
443
Simonin, B. L. (1997) ‘The importance of collaborative know-how: An empirical test of the learning
organization’. Academy Management Journal, 40: 1150–1174.
Simonin, B. L. (1999) ‘Ambiguity and the process of knowledge transfer in strategic alliances’. Strategic
Management Journal, 20: 595–623.
Simonin, B. L. and Ruth, J. A. (1998) ‘Is a company known by the company it keeps? Assessing the
spillover effects of brand alliances on consumer brand attitudes’. Journal of Marketing Research, 35:
30–42.
Simoons, P. (2016) ‘Are alliance managers a different kind of people?’ Available online at www.petersimoons.com/2012/07/are-alliance-managers-a-different-kind-of-people/ (accessed 20 July 2016).
Singh, H., Bell, J. and Kale, P. (2008) Philips: Building alliance capabilities. Philadelphia, PA:Wharton.
SkyTeam (2021) ‘SkyTeam expands SkyCare&Protect Pledge with new digital, health and safety measures’. Available online at www.skyteam.com/en/about/press-releases/press-releases-2021/skyteamexpands (accessed 8 November 2022).
SkyTeam (2022) ‘Delta and Aeromexico launch touchless check-in, powered by SkyTeam technology’.
Available online at www.skyteam.com/en/about/press-releases/press-releases-2022/delta-andaeromexico-launch-touchless-check-in-powered-by-skyteam-technology (accessed 8 November
2022).
Smith, P., Haslam, S. A. and Nielsen, J. F. (2018) ‘In search of identity leadership: An ethnographic
study of emergent infuence in an interorganizational R&D team’. Organization Studies, 39(10):
1425–1447.
SolarDuck (2022) ‘Our purpose’. Available online at https://solarduck.tech/#purpose (accessed 7
November 2022).
SotaTek (2022) ‘Strategic partnership announcement: SotaTek x Dvision network’. Available online
at www.sotatek.com/strategic-partnership-announcement-sotatek-dvision-network/ (accessed 17
October 2022).
Spekman, R. E., Forbes,T. M. III, Isabella, L.A. and MacAvoy,T. C. (1998) ‘Alliance management:A view
from the past and a look to the future’. Journal of Management Studies, 35(5): 747–772.
Stadtler, L. and Van Wassenhove, L. N. (2016) ‘Coopetition as a paradox: Integrative approaches in a
multi-company, cross-sector partnership’. Organization Studies, 37: 655–685.
Stafford, E. R. (1994) ‘Using co-operative strategies to make alliances work’. Long Range Planning, 27:
64–74.
Stafford, E. R., Polonsky, M. J. and Hartman, C. L. (2000) ‘Environmental NGO—business collaboration
and strategic bridging: A case analysis of the Greenpeace—Foron alliance’. Business Strategy and the
Environment, 9: 122–135.
Starbuck Coffee Company (2021) ‘Starbucks pickup and Amazon go collaborate to launch new store
concept in New York City’.Available online at https://stories.starbucks.com/press/2021/starbuckspickup-and-amazon-go-collaborate-to-launch-new-store-concept-in-new-york-city/ (accessed 8
November 2022).
Starbuck Coffee Company (2022a) ‘Starbucks affrms commitment to a planet positive future through
innovation and learnings from store partners’. Available online at https://stories.starbucks.com/
press/2022/starbucks-affrms-commitment-to-a-planet-positive-future-through-innovation-andlearnings-from-store-partners (accessed 8 November 2022).
Starbuck Coffee Company (2022b) ‘Delta Air Lines and Starbucks launch loyalty partnership’.Available
online at https://stories.starbucks.com/press/2022/delta-air-lines-and-starbucks-launch-loyaltypartnership (accessed 8 November 2022).
Starbuck Coffee Company (2022c) ‘Company profle’. Available online at https://stories.starbucks.
com/uploads/2022/05/AboutUs-Company-Profle-5.5.22.pdf (accessed 8 November 2022).
StartPath (2016) ‘StartPath global’. Available online at www.startpath.com/global/ (accessed 14
December 2016).
Statista (2017) ‘Size of the global oral care market from 2013 to 2021’.Available online at www.statista.
com/statistics/326389/global-oral-care-market-size/ (accessed 19 December 2016).
Steensma, H. K., Marino, L. and Weaver, K. M. (2000) ‘The infuence of national culture on the formation of technology alliances by entrepreneurial frms’. Academy of Management Journal, 43: 951–973.

444
References
Sterling, B. (2013) ‘A crowdsourcing alliance between Quirky and General Electric’. Available online at
www.wired.com/2013/04/a-crowdsourcing-alliance-between-quirky-and-general-electric/ (accessed
1 September 2022).
Stock, R. M. (2006) ‘Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners between supplier and customer
companies’. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34: 588–599.
Stock, R. M. (2014) ‘How should customers be integrated for effective interorganizational NPD teams?
An input-process-output perspective’. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31: 535–551.
Street,T. and Cameron,A. F. (2007) ‘External relationships and the small business:A review of small business alliance and network research’. Journal of Small Business Management, 45: 239–266.
Stuart,T. E. (2000) ‘Interorganizational alliances and the performance of frms: A study of growth and
innovation rates in a high-technology industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 21: 791–811.
Stubbs,W., Dahlmann, F. and Raven, R. (2022) ‘The purpose ecosystem and the United Nations sustainable development goals: Interactions among private sector actors and stakeholders’. Journal of Business
Ethics, 180: 1097–1112.
Sukoco, B. M. (2015) ‘Interrelatedness, interdependencies, and domain learning in alliance portfolios’.
International Journal of Business, 20: 160–177.
Swait, J., Erdem,T., Louviere, J. and Dubelaar, C. (1993) ‘The equalization price:A measure of consumerperceived brand equity’. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 10: 23–45.
Szulanski, G. (1996) ‘Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within
the frm’. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 27–43.
Tan, K. C. (2001) ‘A framework of supply chain management literature’. European Journal of Purchasing
and Supply Management, 7: 39–48.
Taras,V., Rowney, J. and Steel, P. (2009) ‘Half a century of measuring culture: Review of approaches,
challenges, and limitations based on the analysis of 121 instruments for quantifying culture’. Journal
of International Management, 15: 357–373.
Teece, D. (1992) ‘Competition, cooperation, and innovation: Organizational arrangements for regimes of
rapid technological progress’. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 18: 1–25.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G. and Shuen, A. (1997) ‘Dynamic capabilities and strategic management’. Strategic
Management Journal, 18: 509–533.
Teng, B. (2005) ‘The emergence and popularization of strategic alliances: Institutional and entrepreneurial views’. International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal, 1: 61–82.
Tesla (2013) ‘Panasonic and Tesla reach agreement to expand supply of automotive-grade battery cells’.
Available online at www.tesla.com/blog/panasonic-and-tesla-reach-agreement-expand-supplyautomotivegrade-battery-cells (accessed 24 October 2016).
Tesla (2016) ‘Tesla and Panasonic to collaborate on photovoltaic cell and module production in Buffalo,
New York’. Available online at www.tesla.com/blog/tesla-and-panasonic-collaborate (accessed 24
October 2016).
The Rhythm of Business (2016) ‘Sample pages alliance management guidebook: Managing
BioPharma strategic alliances’. Available online at http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/1139545/
23746222/1456624855150/AMguideSample.pdf?token=MPwT7y1pJX04edu FTTT9468h%2BZs%3D
(accessed 20 July 2016).
The TechScoop (2011) ‘IBM processors power Wii U’. Available online at www.thetechscoop.
net/2011/06/11/ibm-processors-power-wii-u/ (accessed 2 August 2011).
Thibaut, J.W. and Kelley, H. H. (1959) The social psychology of groups. New York:Wiley.
Thompson, L. (1990) ‘Negotiation behavior and outcomes—empirical-evidence and theoretical issues’.
Psychological Bulletin, 108: 515–532.
Tjemkes, B. (2008) Growing and sharing the pie:A study of performance in strategic alliances. Nijmegen: Radboud University Nijmegen.
Tjemkes, B. and Furrer, O. (2010) ‘The antecedents of response strategies in strategic alliances’. Management Decision, 48: 1103–1133.
Tjemkes, B. and Furrer, O. (2011) ‘Behavioral responses to adverse situations in strategic alliances’. In
Das,T. K. (ed.), Behavioral perspectives on strategic alliances. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing
Researching Strategic Alliances, pp. 227–249.

References
445
Tjemkes, B.V. (2021) ‘Collaborative transformation’. In Tjemkes, B.V. and Mihalache, O. (eds.), Transformative strategizing: Strategizing the unknown in the age of globalization, disruption, collaboration, and
responsibility.Abingdon:Taylor & Francis Ltd, pp. 107–136.
Tjemkes, B.V. (2022) I feel the earth move: Reigniting strategic management with purpose. Amsterdam: Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam.
Tjemkes, B.V. and Mihalache, O. (eds.). (2021) Transformative strategizing: Strategizing the unknown in the
age of globalization, disruption, collaboration, and responsibility (edited book).Abingdon: Routledge.
Today in Windows (2001) ‘What does the Nokia—Microsoft partnership mean?’. Available online at
www.todayinwindows.com/2011/04/what-does-the-nokia-microsoft-partnership-mean/ (accessed
2 August 2011).
Tokio Marine (2022) ‘Singapore:Tokio Marine and Bolttech form strategic alliance’.Available online at
www.asiainsurancereview.com/News/View-NewsLetterArticle/id/82627/Type/eDaily/SingaporeTokio-Marine-and-bolttech-form-strategic-alliance (accessed 18 October 2022).
Toyota (2021) ‘Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Subaru, Toyota, Mazda, and Yamaha take on challenge to
expand options for producing, transporting, and using fuel toward achieving carbon neutrality’.
Available online at https://global.toyota/en/newsroom/corporate (accessed 17 October 2022).
Trompenaars, F. (1993) Riding the waves of culture: Understanding cultural diversity in business. London:The
Economist Books.
Turiera,T. and Cros, S. (2013) Co-businesses: 50 examples of business collaboration.Valencia: Co-Society.
Ul-Haq, R. U.-H. (2005) Alliances and co-evolution: Insights from the banking sector. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
UNFCCC (2022) ‘The Paris Agreement: What is the Paris Agreement?’. Available online at https://
unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-agreement (accessed 7 November
2022).
Vandaie, R. and Zaheer, A. (2014) ‘Surviving bear hugs: Firm capability, large partner alliances, and
growth’. Strategic Management Journal, 35: 566–577.
van der Kamp, M.,Tjemkes, B.V., Duplat,V. and Jehn, K. (2022) ‘On alliance teams: Conceptualization,
review, and future research agenda’. Human Relations. https://doi.org/10.1177/00187267221104985.
van der Meer-Kooistra, J. and Kamminga, P. E. (2015) ‘Joint venture dynamics:The effects of decisions
made within a parent company and the role of joint venture management control’. Management
Accounting Research, 26: 23–39.
van Dyck,W. (2012) ‘Building and leveraging your ecosystem to spark innovation-based growth’.Available online at http://iveybusinessjournal.com/publication/building-and-leveraging-your-ecosystemto-spark-innovation-based-growth/ (accessed 20 July 2016).
Vangen, S. and Huxham, C. (2003) ‘Enacting leadership for collaborative advantage: Dilemmas of ideology and pragmatism in the activities of partnership managers’. British Journal of Management, 14:
S61–S76.
van Wijk, R. and Nadolska,A. (2020) ‘Making more of alliance portfolios:The role of alliance portfolio
coordination’. European Management Journal, 38(3): 388–399.
Venkatraman, N., Koh, J. and Loh, L. (1994) ‘The adoption of corporate governance mechanisms:A test
of competing diffusion models’. Management Science, 40: 496–507.
Villalonga, B. and McGahan, A. M. (2005) ‘The choice among acquisitions, alliances, and divestitures’.
Strategic Management Journal, 26: 1183–1208.
Vink, J., Koskela-Huotari, K., Tronvoll, B., Edvardsson, B. and Wetter-Edman, K. (2021) ‘Service ecosystem design: Propositions, process model, and future research agenda’. Journal of Service Research,
24(2): 168–186.
Visioni, L. J., Palmer, N., Hughes, J., Weiss, J. and Kliman, S. (2010) ‘Right from the start: The seven
virtues of a successful alliance launch’. International Journal of Strategic Business Alliances, 1: 401–423.
Vlaar, P.W. L. (2006) Making sense of formalization in interorganizational relationships: Beyond coordination and
control. Rotterdam: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam.
Vlaar, P. W. L., Van den Bosch, F. A. J. and Volberda, H. W. (2007) ‘Towards a dialectic perspective on
formalization in interorganizational relationships: How alliance managers capitalize on the duality
inherent in contracts, rules and procedures’. Organization Studies, 28: 437–466.

446
References
Volberda, H.W. and Lewin,A.Y. (2003) ‘Guest editors’ introduction—co-evolutionary dynamics within
and between frms: From evolution to co-evolution’. Journal of Management Studies, 40: 2111–2136.
Votolato, N. L. and Unnava, H. R. (2006) ‘Spillover of negative information on brand alliances’. Journal
of Consumer Psychology, 16: 196–202.
Walmart (2016) ‘Collaboration’.Available online at http://corporate.walmart.com/sourcing/collaboration (accessed 2 December 2016).
Walmart (2021) ‘Walmart partners with Netfix on new product lines’. Available online at www.
pymnts.com/news/retail/2021/walmart-partners-with-netfix-on-new-product-lines (accessed 17
October 2022).
Walter, G. A. and Barney, J. B. (1990) ‘Research notes and communications management objectives in
mergers and acquisitions’. Strategic Management Journal, 11: 79–86.
Wang,Y. G., Wange,Y., Wanga, N., Jiang, L.,Yang, Z. and Cuie,V. (2016) ‘Managing relationships with
power advantage buyers:The role of supplier initiated bonding tactics in long-term buyer-supplier
collaborations’. Journal of Business Research, 69: 5587–5596.
Wang,Y. K. (2015) ‘The impact of prestigious top management team on international alliance formation: Evidence from Taiwanese electronics frms’. Journal of Management & Organization, 21: 835–852.
Wang,Y. Z. and Rajagopalan, N. (2015) ‘Alliance capabilities: Review and research agenda’. Journal of
Management, 41: 236–260.
Washburn, J. H.,Till, B.A., Priluck, R. and Boughton, P. D. (2000) ‘The effect of co-branding on search,
experience, and credence attribute performance ratings before and after product trial’. American
Marketing Association Summer Marketing Educators’ Conference, Chicago IL,Volume 11, 117.
Wassmer, U. (2008) ‘Alliance portfolios: A review and research agenda’. Journal of Management, 36:
141–171.
Wassmer, U. (2010) ‘How to manage alliance better than one at a time’. MIT Sloan Management Review,
51: 77–84.
Wassmer, U. and Dussauge, P. (2012) ‘Network resource stocks and fows: How do alliance portfolios
affect the value of new alliance formations?’. Strategic Management Journal, 33: 871–883.
Wassmer, U., Paquin, R. and Sharma, S. (2014) ‘The engagement of frms in environmental collaborations: Existing contributions and future directions’. Business & Society, 53(6): 754–786.
Wathne, K. H. and Heide, J. B. (2000) ‘Opportunism in interfrm relationships: Forms, outcomes, and
solutions’. Journal of Marketing, 64: 36–51.
Weber, L. and Mayer, K. J. (2011) ‘Designing effective contracts: Exploring the infuence of framing and
expectations’. Academy of Management Review, 36(1): 53–75.
Weick, K. (1979) The social psychology of organizing. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Weis, S. E. (2011) ‘Negotiating the Renault—Nissan alliance: Insights from Renault’s experience’. In
Benoliel, M. (ed.), Negotiation excellence. Singapore:World Scientifc Publishers Company, pp. 315–340.
Weitz, B. E. and Jap, S. D. (1995) ‘Relationship marketing and distribution channels’. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 23: 305–320.
Westman, C. and Thorgren, S. (2016) ‘Partner conficts in international joint ventures:A minority owner
perspective’. Journal of International Management, 22: 168–185.
Wickert, C. (2021) ‘Strategizing corporate social responsibility’. In Tjemkes, B. V. and Mihalache, O.
(eds.), Transformative strategizing: Strategizing the unknown in the age of globalization, disruption, collaboration, and responsibility.Abingdon:Taylor & Francis Ltd, pp. 137–158.
Wikipedia (2022) ‘Environmental effects of shipping’. Available online at https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Environmental_effects_of_shipping#:~:text=Maritime%20transport%20accounts%20for%20
3.5,ranking%20between%20Japan%20and%20Germany (accessed 6 November 2022).
Williams,T. (2005) ‘Cooperation by design: Structure and cooperation in interorganizational networks’.
Journal of Business Research, 58: 223–231.
Williamson, O. E. (1975) Markets and hierarchies:Analysis and antitrust implications. New York: Free Press.
Williamson, O. E. (1981) ‘The economics of organization—the transaction cost approach’. American
Journal of Sociology, 87: 548–577.
Williamson, O. E. (1985) The economic institutions of capitalism. New York: Free Press.

References
447
Williamson, O. E. (1991) ‘Comparative economic organization—analysis of discrete structural alternatives’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 36: 269–296.
Williamson, P. J. and De Meyer,A. (2012) ‘Ecosystem advantage: How to successfully harness the power
of partners’. California Management Review, 55(1): 24–46.
Wilson, J. and Hynes, N. (2009) ‘Co-evolution of frms and strategic alliances: Theory and empirical
evidence’. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 76: 620–628.
Wit de, B. and Meyer, R. (2004) Strategy process, content, context:An international perspective. London:Thomson Learning.
Wittmann, C. M. (2007) ‘Strategic alliances: What can we learn when they fail?’ Journal of Business-toBusiness Marketing, 14: 1–19.
White, G. O., Joplin, J. R.W. and Salama, M. F. (2007) ‘Contracts and confict resolution strategies in foreign ventures:A transaction cost perspective’. International Journal of Confict Management, 18: 376–390.
Wojciszke, B., Brycz, H. and Borkenau, P. (1993) ‘Effects of information-content and evaluative extremity on positivity and negativity biases’. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64: 327–335.
Wolfe, R. J. and McGinn, K. L. (2005) ‘Perceived relative power and its infuence on negotiations’. Group
Decision and Negotiation, 14: 3–20.
Wood, G. (2002) ‘A partnership model of corporate ethics’. Journal of Business Ethics, 40: 61–73.
WWF (2020) ‘Bolton Food: Together to support more sustainable fshing and our oceans’. Available
online at https://wwf.panda.org/act/partner_with_wwf/corporate_partnerships/who_we_work_
with/bolton_food/ (accessed 18 October 2022).
Xu, L. D., Xu, E. L. and Ling, L. (2018) ‘Industry 4.0: State of the art and future trends’. International
Journal of Production Research, 56(8): 2941–2962.
Yan, A. M. and Gray, B. (1994) ‘Bargaining power, management control, and performance in United
States—China joint ventures:A comparative case study’.Academy of Management Journal,37: 1478–1510.
Yan,A. M. and Gray, B. (2001) ‘Antecedents and effects of parent control in international joint ventures’.
Journal of Management Studies, 38: 393–416.
Yan,A. M. and Luo,Y. (2001) International joint ventures:Theory and practice. New York: Routledge.
Yan, A. M. and Zeng, M. (1999) ‘International joint venture instability: A critique of previous research,
a reconceptualization, and directions for future research’. Journal of International Business Studies, 30:
397–414.
Yang, H. B., Zheng,Y. and Zaheer,A. (2015) ‘Asymmetric learning capabilities and stock market returns’.
Academy of Management Journal, 58: 356–374.
Yang, H. B., Zheng,Y. and Zhao, X. (2014) ‘Exploration or exploitation? Small frms’ alliance strategies
with large frms’. Strategic Management Journal, 35: 146–157.
Yang, M.-H., Liao, C.-H. and Liu, S.-C. (2007) ‘Applying internet-based information systems to facilitate business alliance activities’. Internet-based Information Systems, 107: 125–140.
Yeheskel, O., Zeira, O., Shenkar,Y. and Newburry, W. (2001) ‘Parent company dissimilarity and equity
international joint venture effectiveness’. Journal of International Management, 7: 81–104.
Yin, J. and Jamali, D. (2021) ‘Collide or collaborate:The interplay of competing logics and institutional
work in cross-sector social partnerships’. Journal of Business Ethics, 169: 673–694.
Yin, X. L. and Shanley, M. (2008) ‘Industry determinants of the “merger versus alliance” decision’. Academy of Management Review, 33: 473–491.
Yli-Renko, H. and Autio, E. (1998) ‘The network embeddedness of new, technology-based frms:
Developing a systemic evolution model’. Small Business Economics, 11: 253–267.
Yli-Renko, H.,Autio, E. and Sapienza, H. J. (2001) ‘Social capital, knowledge acquisition, and knowledge
exploitation in young technology-based frms’. Strategic Management Journal, 22: 587–613.
Yoon,W. J., Lee, D.Y. and Song, J. (2015) ‘Alliance network size, partner diversity, and knowledge creation
in small biotech frms’. Journal of Management & Organization, 21: 614–626.
Zaccaro, S. J., Marks, M.A. and DeChurch, L.A. (2012) Multiteam systems:An organization form for dynamic
and complex environments. New York: Routledge.
Zagt,A. (2015) ‘Bond moet weer aan het bier, én de wodka’.Available online at www.ad.nl/show/bondmoet-weer-aan-het-bier-en-de-wodka~acf5fa35/ (accessed 2 December 2016).

448
References
Zahoor, N., Khan, Z. and Shenkar, O. (2023) ‘International vertical alliances within the international
business feld: A systematic literature review and future research agenda. Journal of World Business,
58(1): 101385.
Zahra, S. A. and George, G. (2002) ‘Absorptive capacity: A review, reconceptualization, and extension’.
Academy of Management Review, 27: 185–203.
Zahra, S. and Nambisan, S. (2012) ‘Entrepreneurship and strategic thinking in business ecosystems’. Business Horizons, 55: 219–229.
Zajac, E. J. and Olsen, C. P. (1993) ‘From transaction cost to transactional value analysis—implications for
the study of interorganizational strategies’. Journal of Management Studies, 30: 131–145.
Zeng, J., Zaheer, K. and De Silva, M. (2019) ‘The emergence of multi-sided platform MNEs: Internalization theory and networks’. International Business Review, 28(6): 101598.
Zeng, M. and Chen, X. P. (2003) ‘Achieving cooperation in multiparty alliances: A social dilemma
approach to partnership management’. Academy of Management Review, 28: 587–605.
Zeng, M. and Hennart, J. F. (2002) ‘From learning races to cooperative specialization: Towards a new
framework for alliance management’. In Contractor, F. J. and Lorange, P. (eds.), Cooperative strategies
and alliances.Amsterdam: Pergamon International Business and Management Series, pp. 189–210.
Zhang, Y. and Li, H. (2001) ‘The control design and performance in international joint ventures:
A dynamic evolution perspective’. International Business Review, 10: 95–113.
Zhang,Y., Chang, X., Liu,Y.,Wang,Y. and Li, H. (2021) ‘Urban expansion simulation under constraint
of multiple ecosystem services (MESs) based on cellular automata (CA)-Markov model: Scenario
analysis and policy implications’. Land Use Policy, 108: 105667.
Zheng,Y. and Yang, H. (2015) ‘Does familiarity foster innovation? The impact of alliance partner repeatedness on breakthrough innovations’. Journal of Management Studies, 52: 213–230.
Ziggers, G. W. and Tjemkes, B.V. (2010) ‘Dynamics in inter-frm collaboration: The impact of alliance
capabilities on performance’. International Journal of Food System Dynamics, 1: 151–166.
Zineldin, M. (2004) ‘Coopetition:The organisation of the future’. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 22:
780–790.
Zinn,W. and Parasuraman, A. (1997) ‘Scope and intensity of logistics-based strategic alliances—a conceptual classifcation and managerial implications’. Industrial Marketing Management, 26: 137–147.
Zollo, M., Reuer, J. J. and Singh, H. (2002) ‘Interorganizational routines and performance in strategic
alliances’. Organization Science, 13: 701–713.
Zoogah, D. B.,Vora, D., Richard, O. and Peng, M.W. (2011) ‘Strategic alliance team diversity, coordination, and effectiveness’. International Journal of Human Resource Management, 22: 510–529.

INDEX
Note: Page numbers in italic indicate a fgure and page numbers in bold indicate a table on the corresponding page.
absorptive capacity 159–161, 165–166
acceptance tactics 212–219
accommodated exit 133–134
accountability confict 225
aggressive voice 98–99
alliance capabilities 352 – 355, 355, 359 – 362,
359; alliance office 265, 361 – 364;
alliance tools 355 – 357, 357, 361 – 363;
competence levels 326, 358 – 360, 359;
Philips 363 – 364
alliance champion role 324, 327
alliance co-evolution: alliance system 376–388;
co-evolutionary view 376–379; drivers of
379–386; Nexia 380
alliance competence 10–11
alliance contracts 52–53, 64–67, 69–75, 92–95,
129–132, 184–185, 213–221, 247–249;
contractual clauses 65, 168–169, 200–201;
learning alliances 156–172
alliance coordination routines 353–354
alliance coordinator role 324–327
alliance design 57–77; alliance contracts
52–53, 64–67, 69–75, 92–95, 129–132,
167–169, 184–185, 213–221, 247–249;
alliance mirror design 70, 70; contractual
clauses 65, 168–169, 200–201; control
dimensions 68–69; control modes 67–68,
71; joint ventures 59–60, 200–201; L’OrealOrganovo 75–77; management control 67–69,
101–103; non-equity and equity-based
governance forms 58–62, 61; structural
confguration 69–71
alliance development stages 6–11, 8
alliance evaluation 109–123, 118; performance
metric system 104–105, 109–112, 116–121;
economic approach 113–114; learning
approach 115; operational approach 114;
performance metric approaches 112–117;
relational approach 115–116; strategic
approach 114
Alliance for Open Media 237
alliance function 254–255, 258–261, 405–406
alliance launch 78–91, 80, 82, 86; alliance
relaunch 88–89; Capgemini–Eneco 89–91;
confict management 93, 96–97, 103, 230;
inter-partner learning 100–101, 104–106;
organizational justice 96; relational governance
theory 93–95; response strategies 98–100;
TNO–Hoogendoorn 107–108; types of trust
94–95
alliance management 92–108; approaches
92–101; decision-making steps 103–106;
and design 101–103; TNO–Hoogendoorn
107–108
alliance manager role 327–330
alliance mindset 365–375; meaning of 365–367;
Microsoft 374–375; tensions 367–373
alliance negotiation 43–56; negotiation behavior
43–48; negotiation dynamics 46–48;
negotiation stage 49–53; negotiation strategies
43–48, 45; negotiation tactics 45–46, 45;
negotiation team 50–53; post-negotiation 49,
52, 411; pre-negotiation 49, 51, 72; Renault–
Nissan 54–56
alliance networks 284–299; IBM 297–299;
network confgurations 289; network
dynamics 292; network management 287,
290–293; network position 286–290,
293–295
alliance ofces 265, 361–364
450
Index
alliance paradox: cooperative vs competitive
369; corporate vs societal 369; deliberate vs
emergent 369; structure vs process 369
alliance partner selection 30–42; partner
ft analysis 36, 38, 218, 231; partner ft
framework 36–37, 104–106; risk assessment
38–39; SolarDuck 39–42
alliance portfolios 267–283; General Electric
281–283; governance 269–277; portfolio design
269–275; Toyota’s suppliers’ portfolio 270
alliance proactiveness 353–354, 361
alliance professionals 320–335; alliance manager
327–330; competences 327–330; eVision
333–335; Ivan Vogels 333–335
alliance relaunch 88–89
alliance strategy formulation 13–29; Google–
HubSpot 28–29; governance mode rationales
15–25, 14; institutional theory 15–16, 22–23;
organizational learning perspective 21–22,
63; resource-based view 15–19; resource
dependence perspective 15, 19, 24, 63;
social network theory 21; transaction cost
economics 15–16
alliance system 376–388, 383; co-evolutionary
view 376–379; drivers of alliance co-evolution
379–386; oral care appliances 386–388
alliance team member role 324–326, 337, 343,
346, 350, 403
alliance teams 336–351; Dutch Optics Centre
349–351; multi-team system 344–349, 345
alliance termination 124–137; disengage
125–126, 131, 133; Nokia–Microsoft
135–137
alliance training 332, 355–356, 360–361
alliance transformation routines 354
‘ally’ governance mode 7, 13–15, 14
Amazon 317–318
Apple 317–318
ASAP certifcation 329
asymmetrical alliances 208–221; acceptance
tactics 212–219; defensive tactics 211–219;
Disney–Pixar 219–221; ofensive tactics
211–219
behavioural control 67–68, 111, 385
BMW 176
bounded rationality 17, 94, 370, 384
brand and product ft 177–179, 177
brand associations 176–181, 185
brand attitudes 177–181
brand awareness 173, 179, 183, 239, 321
brand equity 173, 177–186
brand loyalty 179, 185
business ecosystems 300–318; Apple vs Amazon
317–318; attributes 303–309; challenge
300–303; decision-making steps 312–316;
managing 309–312
‘buy’ governance mode 7, 13–15, 14
Capgemini–Eneco alliance 89–91
CARE–Cargill alliance 223
Cargill 223
Cisco Hyperinnovation Living Labs (CHILL)
301
closure see network density
coach role 355
co-branding alliances 173–188; brand and
product ft 177–178; brand equity
179–180; contractual provisions 73–74;
Heineken–James Bond 186–188
Cognizant 157
collaborative commitment 226–232
collective identity 142–147, 150–151
Compaq 298
compatibility 30–32, 35–39
competences (Levels 1–3) 358–361
competition law 246–247
complementary resource alignment 31
confict management 93, 96–97
considerate voice 98–99
contemporary alliances 389–399; societal
responsibility 392–394; technological
innovation 389–392; theoretical implications
394–396; Torvald Klaveness 397–399
contractual completeness 64
contractual governance 102, 218, 255,
257–258
control dimensions 68–69
control modes 67–68
coopetition alliances 236–252; competition law
246–247; Reckitt Benckiser 250–252
co-partnering see co-branding alliances
Coruna University 223
creative voice 98–99
cross-sector alliances 222–234; culture of
collaborative commitment 226, 227–228;
Marks & Spencer–Oxfam 232–234
crowdsourcing 308
cultural competence 196–197
cultural ft 34–35, 165–166
Damen Shipyards 40, 204–206
DBS Singapore 121–123
decision-making steps: alliance capabilities
360–362; alliance design 71–75; alliance
evaluation 117–120; alliance launch 85–89;
alliance management 103–106; alliance
negotiation 48–53; alliance networks
293–297; alliance partner selection 35–39;
alliance portfolios 277–281; alliance
professionals 330–332; alliance strategy
formulation 25–28; alliance teams 346–349;
alliance termination 131–134; asymmetrical
alliances 215–219; business ecosystems
312–316; co-branding alliances 181–185;
coopetition alliance 244–250; cross-sector
alliances 228–232; international alliances
Index
198–203; learning alliances 164–170; supplier
alliances 146–151
defensive tactics 213–214, 217–219
director of alliances 326
Disney–Pixar alliance 219–221
distributive negotiation 44–46, 52–53
DOC (Dutch Optics Centre) 349–351
Drupal 301, 304
DSM 3, 190
dual branding 173, 182
Dutch Optics Centre (DOC) 349–351
ecosystems see business ecosystems
egocentric alliance network 287
Eneco 89–91
entrepreneurial ecosystem 306–307
eVision 333–335
EVO Electric 144
Evoque 144
executive sponsor role 135, 324, 327
exit 59–61, 98–99, 129–134, 259–263
expert role 355
exploration strategy 270, 273–274, 280, 289
ExxonMobil 151
fnancial experts 356
Ford–Mazda alliance 55
FORTRAN 297
free riding 58, 255–264, 310–311
Fujitsu 298
General Electric (GE) 281–283
General Motors 195, 285
Gillette 176, 387
GKN 144
GLT PLUS 151–155
goal hierarchy 341, 344–345, 347–348
Google–HubSpot alliance 28–29
GoPro–Red Bull alliance 174
governance dimension 271–272
Hague Security Delta (HSD) 301
hard tactics 45–47, 53, 194
Heineken 186–188
Hewlett Packard (HP) 298, 354, 356
hold-up problems 58
Holst Centre 170–172
Hoogendoorn 107–108
human ft 32, 35–36, 38, 49, 106
IBM 297–299
Inditex–Coruna University alliance 223
individualism–collectivism 191–192, 368
innovation ecosystem 306
institutional conficts 224
institutional theory (IT) 15–16, 22–23, 24, 63,
128, 370, 395
integrative negotiation 44, 52–53, 165–167
451
Intel 135, 180, 398, 306, 308
intellectual property rights (IPR) 48, 64–66,
74–76, 133, 375
IntelliClean 387
intended termination 134
inter-frm learning 23–24, 31–33, 157–160,
166–169
international alliances 189–206; cultural
competence 196–197; culture as a barrier
193–194; culture as a challenge 194; culture as
opportunity 194–196; Damen Shipyards 40,
204–206; Hofstede’s fve cultural dimensions
192; national cultural dimensions 191–193
international joint venture (IJV) 60, 200–201,
342–343
inter-partner learning 100–101, 104–106
Ivan Vogels 333–335
joint advertising 176, 182
joint promotion 175–178, 181–183, 187
joint venture 2–4, 58–61, 64–65, 200–202,
337–343
JP Morgan Chase & Co.: In-Residence 209
knowledge ambiguity 162–163
knowledge characteristics 159, 159, 162–163
knowledge management 275, 354–355
knowledge manager (alliance function) 164, 355
knowledge practices 159, 163
knowledge protection 156–159, 162–166,
169–170
learning alliances 156–172; absorptive capacity
160; alliance contracts 64–67; alliance
design 57–77; alliance evaluation 109–123;
alliance launch 78–91; alliance management
92–108; alliance negotiation 43–56; alliance
partner selection 30–42; alliance strategy
formulation 13–29; alliance termination
124–137; governance form 161; Holst Centre
170–172; knowledge characteristics 159,
162–163; knowledge practices 159, 163; open
innovation 158, 170–172, 387–390; relational
capital 93–95
legal experts 126, 131–132, 355–356
Lendico–PostFinance alliance 190
litigated exit 133–134
L’Oreal–Organovo alliance 75–77
‘make’ governance mode 7, 13–15, 14
management control 67–69
management development programmes 361
Marks & Spencer–Oxfam alliance 232–234
MasterCard:StartPathTM 209
mediated exit 133
MeeGo 135, 137
Microsoft 135–137, 374–375
mirror structure design 70
452
Index
Mizuho Financial Group–Cognizant alliance
157
multi-partner alliances 253–266; orchestrator
role 255, 256, 258–259; relational governance
255–258, 263; resource complementarity
255–256; SkyTeam 264–266
multi-team system 344–349, 345
multi-sided platforms 391
NAM–GLT PLUS 151–155
national culture: cultural competence 196–197;
Hofstede’s fve cultural dimensions 192
Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij (NAM)
151–152
negotiation behaviour 43–48
negotiation dynamics 46–48
negotiation stage 49–53
negotiation strategies 43–48, 45
negotiation tactics 45–46
network centrality 288
network criteria 26
network density 288
network dynamics 292
network facilitator (alliance function) 355
network management 287, 290–293
network position 284–290, 293–297;
confgurations 286–295
Nexia 380
NGO–business partnerships 222, 224–225
Nike 176, 179, 285, 363
Nintendo 314
Nissan 54–56
Nokia–Microsoft alliance 135–137
non-equity and equity-based governance 58–63,
61
NUMMI 195
ofensive tactics 142, 212–218
open innovation 157–158, 170–172, 389–390
operational ft 34, 36–38
opportunism 62–66, 93–99, 142–144
opportunistic behaviour 57–58, 64–68,
142–145, 149–151, 200–201
Oral-B 387–388
oral care appliances 386–388
orchestra model 306
orchestrator role 256, 258–265
organizational ft 32, 33–34, 37, 106, 166
organizational justice 96
organizational learning perspective (OLP) 15,
21–22, 24, 63
Organovo 75–77
output control 111, 380
Oxfam 232–234, 367
partner ft 30–35, 32
partner profle 36–37, 353
partner selection 30–42, 36, 197, 216, 229–230,
245–246, 259–261, 278–279, 294, 314
patience 98, 197, 331
performance metrics 117: approaches 113;
economic approach 113–114; learning
approach 115; operational approach 114;
relational approach 115–116; strategic
approach 114
performance metric system 109, 111–112,
116–121, 131–132, 249–250
Pfzer–BioNtech 237
Philips 363–364
Pixar 219–221
platform ecosystem 307
portfolio management 171, 267–271
PostFinance 190
post-negotiation stage 49, 52, 411
power distance 191–195, 205
power neutrality 226, 229, 231–232
pre-negotiation stage 49, 51, 72
private benefts 110, 240
Proctor & Gamble (P&G) 304, 386
public–private partnerships 222–225
public–private–plural alliances 408
rational tactics 45, 46
Reckitt Benckiser 250–252
Red Bull 174
relational capital 93–95, 140–143, 167–170
relational governance 93–95, 102–106, 144–151,
256, 258
relational governance theory (RGT) 93–95
Renault–Nissan alliance 54–56
resource-based motives 26, 31
resource-based view (RBV) 18–23, 394–396
resource complementarity 30–32, 35–39,
165–166, 245–246, 255–256
resource dependence perspective (RDP) 19–20,
24, 63
response strategies 93, 98–100
Royal Dutch Shell see Shell
Royal Philips see Philips
SEMATECH 254, 258, 304
senior alliance manager role 324, 326–327, 338,
347
Sensiplant 107–108
service alliances 407
service-based ecosystems 407
Shell 151, 175
shirking 58
SkyTeam 264–266
social control 67–68, 111, 194, 371
social exchange theory 99, 128, 142
social network theory (SNT) 21, 23, 24, 63
soft tactics 46–49, 183, 230
SolarDuck 39–42
Index
Solazyme 268
Spectre-Heineken alliance 187
strategic alliance management 1–12; alliance
competence 10; alliance development
stages 6–8, 8, 11; alliance segmentation 9;
cooperative vs competitive alliance paradox
368–370; science and art 400–409
strategic ft 32, 33, 37, 106, 112, 246
strategic management theory (SMT) 20–21, 24, 33
supplier alliances 139–155; NAM–GLT Plus
151–155
Tata Group 285
Tension 368–373, 369
453
Tesla–Panasonic alliance 141
TNO–Hoogendoorn 107–108
Torvald Klaveness 397–399
Toshiba 285
Toyota 54, 195, 237, 270, 275–276
transaction cost economics (TCE) 16–18, 24, 62
trust 52–54, 63–66, 84–85, 94–97, 102, 162,
190–191, 198, 205–206, 214
under-performing alliances 38, 386
unintended termination 125–126, 134, 215, 219
university–industry partnerships 223, 404
Walmart 3
